CON LAW DAY 2

Equal Protection

Constitutional affirmations of slavery:

3/5s clause
ban on banning the slave trade
fugitive slave laws

BUT,

the constitution never uses the word SLAVE
and theres no explicit protection for slavery


The politics of slavery were structured by the constitution
representation in the senate is equal

protection of slavery was piped through the senate

missouri compromise repealed by kansas-nebraska act


the institutions that protected slavery were baked into constitutionalism

no abolition without consent of the slave owning states

DRED SCOTT v SANDFORD


“Dred Scott” gets full name billing in the case name because he’s property

Dred claimed to be free by virtue of being in Illinois and other non-slavery territories (louisiana territory)

left slave state into free land (free state, free territory)

claims this makes him free

he’s bringing the claim in federal court based on diversity jdx

diversity jdx exists where there’s citizens from two different states involved in one controversy

the court looks to the const to determine who is a citizen of Missouri and whether Dred is or not

connect to Mccullough v maryland:
states are really just factions.  they don’t get to tax the bank and they don’t get to decide who counts as a citizen

the justifications for this case aren’t just racist, they’re also backed by other grounds.

slavery was interwoven into the society

citizens means people of the united states

what does “people of the united states mean?”

it means citizens, it means people who were free at the time of the constitution

the court finds that no slave or slave descendant is a member of the people of the US

citizenry means in the const sense sovereign people who hold power and conduct gov’t through their representatives

congress can create citizens through the power of naturalization

“aliens being free white…” could be made citizens

declaration of independence claims all men are created equal

it’s prior authority to the constitution

Taney’s definition of citizenship excludes a bunch of people like white women who thought they were citizens

but he doesn’t care about them, he only cares about crafting a definition that excludes Dred Scott


Taney claims that the public opinion about slavery and subjugation of blacks was fixed and solid

he says you can’t take general language and flex it to allow for citizenship of slaves because it’s totally contrary to public opinion

diversity jdx not available bc DS not a citizen

anyway, the forum state’s laws apply

even still, the property can’t just be taken away (takings clause)

const and public opinion don’t allow for different treatment of slavery compared to other forms of property


if you want to change the meaning of state citizenship, don’t lobby the state, you gotta amend the const


the civil war resulted in three amendments (13, 14, 15)

13th prohibits slavery
14th overturns Dred Scott (birthright citizenship)
15th guarantees the right to vote

14th is of central importance
especially equal protection clause

what kind of equality is guaranteed by the 14th?

plessy v ferguson answers this question

LA statute required equal and separate rail cars for blacks and whites

plessy was 7/8ths white but wouldn’t sit in the black section

this is a test case set up to test the constitutionality of separate public accommodations

the “property in racial reputation” argument was critical in the original case

the lawyer thought the property argument would hold up because ethyl like the protect property

turns out not

what kind of equality does the 14th guarantee?

equality between the races before the law.

the court separates political equality from social equality

political: buy and sell property, vote, etc

14th guarantees political equality, not social equality

social equality is outside the social sphere, no government can make the races like each other

if you can accept the separation of political and social equality, should the gov’t enforce the social inequities?

the maj says the gov should be allowed to enforce the social reality of inequality

two step dance:  separate political and social inequality, then permit gov to enforce the social inequalities

maj makes a step three: gov can do any enforcement of inequality as long as it’s reasonable

TEST OF REASONABLENESS:

reasonable means that which (1) in good faith promotes public order, (2) consistent with traditional usages and customs, and (3) is not enacted merely to annoy or punish a particular group

STEP ONE: two equalities, political and social
STEP TWO: state can enforce social inequality through law
STEP THREE: can enforce social inequality only if reasonable
STEP FOUR: test for reasonableness with three elements

Plessy says that this separation of rail cars is designed to annoy him and his people

the court says that blacks don’t understand their rights, and that white people wouldn’t feel inferior if blacks passed a separation rule

the court says that plessy is just oversensitive

harlan is known as the great dissenter because of this and the civil rights case dissent

he’s straight up racist, but he thinks that the court’s opinion fails on a variety of terms:

1: political equality is at stake here, its not just social equality
2: this is clearly designed to oppress black people, violates reasonableness def of maj
3: this is not a good faith effort to promote public good, it produces racial tension, it fails reasonableness

harlan says that the court fails to apply its own doctrine correctly

he also claims the court should not be judging reasonableness or the expediency of regulation

though, they do of course.  he thinks the real rule of reasonableness is colorblindness

the law must be colorblind

1: they get the application wrong, not reasonable
2: they get the test wrong, should be colorblindness


both colorblindness and reasonableness stay with us

brown v board: political and social equality distinction exploded


CON LAW DAY 3

Last time:

Dred Scott.  The constitution and representational politics all protected slavery.  Slavery was not to be changed without the consent of the slave owning states.

Dred Scott was about protecting the status quo.

Dred Scott Majority federalized the meaning of citizenship

1- when it comes to dealing with a moral issue like slavery, we don’t decide on morality.  we decide on constitutionality.  we apply the law as written

2- we look to see what the intentions were at the time the law was written.  Dred Scott is an Originalist decision.

they say the intentions (to protect slavery) were universal and part of the fabric of society

any general language about “blessings of liberty” or “all men are created equal” must be understood through the lens of intention

they also determined that the law of the forum state (missouri) held.  his status is decided by missouri law.

they say the court had no power to prevent slavery in federal territories.

they say congress doesn’t have the power because public opinion is all for slavery.

since slaves were property and property was protected, congress lacks the power to prevent slavery in fed territories and the missouri compromise is unconstitutional

CITIZENSHIP is still federalized, but now its about birth

14th amendment overturns Dred Scott, but it does not address racial hierarchy

13th abolished slavery, 14th requires equal protection

what does equal protection mean?

plessy v ferguson answers this

it tells us 14th guarantees political equality not social equality

social beliefs can’t be changed by law says the court

1- law cannot change social standing
2- law CAN reinforce social inequality and hierarchies and social distinctions

reinforcement of these social distinctions must be reasonable

plessy three elements:

1. reaonsably enforce social inequality to enforce social order
2. jives with traditional values (established culture)
3. not designed for the annoyance of a race

it’s reasonable to separate rail cars because it’s within the police power of the state to keep people from fist fighting (social order)

it’s traditional just like separate schools

plessy is annoyed, but that’s because he doesn’t understand his rights

Harlan dissents and says its plainly to oppress
it won’t create order because it builds tension
it’s not reasonable, even under the court’s doctrine

more radically, he says the rule of the constitution is colorblindness

if the law uses race, the gov’t can’t do it

it shouldn’t contemplate the reasonableness of any law that uses race

this is Harlan’s reading of what equal protection means, it’s not anywhere in the constitution explicitly

Harlan is still a total racist despite the relative enlightenment of his positions



BROWN v BOARD OF EDUCATION OF TOPEKA

the most celebrated decision in the modern canon

schools were segregating racially across the country

why don’t they use original intentions?

they say the history of the amendment is inconclusive

	HISTORY

			public education didn’t exist in its current form.

			also now, education is compulsory

			it’s an apples to oranges comparison


			there’s an imperfect documentary record

			but more importantly, the original intentions didn’t jive with the outcome they wanted

			they claim the history they see is too mixed to be useful

			but really, they’re just getting past the hangup on original intentions

			they’re also calling the “traditional values” part of the Plessy test of reasonableness

ORIGINAL INTENTIONS ARE USELESS


education is public by ’54

public education is required for good citizenship (very foundation of good citizenship)

education is in the social sphere of plessy’s political/social distinction

citizenship in brown is political

therefore, education is really at least partly political

Warren is collapsing the distinction between political and social equality

“where a state undertakes to provide education, it must do so on an equal basis”



third leg: STIGMA

plessy never says separate but equal.

but, the court operationalizes separate but equal as satisfactory to the “reasonableness” test

materially equal is the de facto test

	NAACP litigation pushes the court to recognize the intangible factors

	the grad school advances later help to set up the push into k-12 education

the colorblindness approach gets us out of the reasonableness analysis

but the Brown court doesn’t do that

they do a stigma analysis instead

they say instead that the official separation by race imposes a stigma and feelings of inferiority

the schools could be equal in every tangible and intangible way, but there’d still be stigma

separate is inherently unequal

the stigmatic argument is narrower than the colorblindness approach


Brown cites some social science studies that show that feelings of inferiority exist in students in segregated schools

the stigmatic argument uses social science

Brandeis had been using social science as legal argument since 1908



So what do we do now?

at least, you can’t assign pupils on the basis of race.

you can still have 100% white schools, you can still have anti-miscegenation laws



BROWN II

enforcement mechanism of Brown I

make a start toward desegregation with all deliberate speed

they delegate the job to the district courts

this started an era where the courts were actively involved in the supervision of schools

	(hospitals and prisons were too)

they say you can’t just disagree with Brown and do nothing

but everything else is pretty much in the open

they leave it all to be worked out in litigation at the lower court levels

they prohibit de jure segregation, but leave plenty of wiggle room for de facto segregation

facial de jure segregation: white kids go here, black kids go there

de jure is official

de facto is in fact

unofficial, but it’s the way things are in fact

the policy is: go to school where you want, but everyone ends up segregated

this is de facto segregation


BROWN doesn’t use de jure and de facto

but it tells us that de jure segregation in public schools is prohibited

BUT brown leaves a lot of wiggle room for de facto segregation



Is sexual orientation something that can be analogized to race?

different treatment (disability imposed) based on non-choice

the court is going to be skeptical about race in the post-brown era

the closer a trait is to race, the more skeptical we should be about the gov’t using that characteristic as a basis for different treatment

wealth is not like race and sexual orientation.


CON LAW DAY 4


BROWN v BOARD review:


Brown sets aside historical/originalist approach from the start

NEW METHOD

education had gone from private and fragmented to public and compulsory

NEW CIRCUMSTANCES


II

Equality of citizenship requires equality of education.

education is part of the political equality guaranteed by the 14th.

racially segregated education is inherently unreasonable.

“there must be equality of the material components and also the intangibles” (descendant of plessy)

the stigma imposed by de jure separation creates a permanent injury by virtue of official separation, even where the facilities are truly equal


THREE BIG POINTS FROM BROWN:

1. no more originalism
2. education is needed for citizenship
3. stigmatic harm means separate is inherently unequal


Brown dismisses the past, where plessy relied on the past
Brown rejects the difference between social and political equality that plessy claimed
Brown rejects the “not designed to annoy or oppress any race” test

BUT

Brown leaves a lot of questions open, namely:

How exactly is segregation to be rooted out?
How about segregation hidden in facially neutral language?
How about segregation in other areas of public life?



TODAY:

we’re looking at a constellation of traits

race is the paradigmatic trait that the gov’t can’t use



Laws classify us all the time

speed limits classify us based on the speed of our cars

THE RATIONAL BASIS TEST

its a means/ends test



three steps:

1. Does it classify on the basis of race?

	if yes, it’s not in rational basis land.

2. What is the end that the law advances?

	is the end legitimate and permissible?

		this is meant to be a low hurdle, it’s meant to admit most gov’t purposes

3. How tight is the fit between the means used and the ends pursued?

	it must be merely rational and not totally insane



the equal protection clause guarantees different treatment so long as the characteristic we’re using

is not a suspect classification

and

is rationally related to a legitimate end


	in race world (strict scrutiny):

		1. compelling gov’t interest (important end?)
		2. narrowly tailored (appropriate means?)


	narrowly tailored means there is no less discriminatory means of achieving that goal

	fit is also sometimes called nexus



RATIONAL BASIS REVIEW


NYC TRANSIT AUTHORITY v BEAZER

methadone users can’t work for the NYCTA

the district court ruled against the TA based on facts about methadone use

the normal screening process and a one-year “probation” waiting period

now, feed the findings into the test:

	race world?

		no.  mostly…

	legitimate end?

		yes.  safety is the main purpose.  efficient and administrable screening process second purpose.

	rationally related?

		district court says no.  based on the findings of the district court, the blanket exclusion of methadone 		users ignores the equally efficient and rational mode of making methadone users wait a year.

		yes.  it’s rationally conceivable that methadone users as a general population are less employable


the classification is under inclusive because it blocks the 2/3 of methadone users who are employable in order to block out the 1/3 who are unemployable

the district court says bad fit means unconstitutional

	you could change the fit in a way that preserves safety and doesn’t compromise efficiency

also, the current classification excludes those who could be safe (responsible methadone users) but it also includes a large group who CAN’T (alcoholics and other addicts)

it’s a lousy classification because it blocks the good junkies and allows in the bad drunks

it’s both under inclusive and over inclusive in this sense

a fit that’s one is typically the other as well

the district court says, no go, do the one year thing.  this law is unconstitutional because it fails rational basis review.

BUT

it’s overturned by the supreme court because the standard is not completely insane

the supreme court doesn’t consider methadone use to be the kind of unpopular trait or affiliation that legislators would target with animus

	it’s not a suspect classification

the court will allow this imperfect employment policy to remain in place because of deference and the politically neutral nature of methadone users


DISSENT:

this is really about the skin color of the users.  most methadone users are poor minorities.  decision makers actually hate these people.  decision makers can’t handle this trait without prejudice or animus.

it’s over inclusive and under inclusive



US DEPT of AGRICULTURE v MORENO

food stamp program denies food stamps to households that include a person who is not a family member

Unrelated persons

the stated purpose is to bolster the agricultural economy and to improve nutrition in poor families

what the relationship between the classification used (unrelated person in a household) and the two ends above

how does denying food stamps to a family advance the goal of stimulating the economy?

it doesn’t!

how does it improve nutrition?

it doesn’t!

1. not in race land (strict scrutiny)
2. end is legitimate

BUT

3. nexus stinks.  not a tight fit.


the pigs in gov’t won’t feed the hippies

so the point of this restriction is to punish hippies

this is not a legitimate gov’t purpose

	DEFERENCE underlies rational basis review

	so whats the difference between a desire to harm tax fakers and hippies?

		desire to harm tax fakers is not BARE congressional hatred

		desire to harm hippies is just an expression of BARE congressional desire to harm hippies

if a mere desire to harm a group was sufficient, then any law would pass rational basis review

congress is trying to say that they’re promoting the family in order to advance values beyond a bare desire to harm


Rational basis TEST:

any degree of fit? (methadone case)

any legitimacy of purpose? (moreno)



	one way to get a court to overturn a law is to get out of rational basis review land

	if you can bump up the standard, you can get a new look

	enter suspect classification land


CITY OF CLEBURNE v CLEBURNE LIVING CENTER


a city blocked a permit for a home for mentally retardeds

reasons for denying:

	-residents might be harassed (although there were retarded kids in the school)
	-might disrupt the quality and property values of the neighborhood, plus upset old folks, residents hate it
	-fire and flood safety

1. race land: classified based on mental ability (a bit like race maybe, but not race, so RB review)
2. purpose: we have a list of fears in the case.  irrational fears are not a legit purpose, tho. but also safety
3. nexus:  bad fit because all kinds of other buildings are allowed to build

problem: radical under inclusion

the combo of bad purpose and bad nexus is too much for the court

	how do we know when we have bare desire to harm when the default position is deference


ROMER v EVANS


	prohibition of sexual orientation protections

the court finds bare desire to harm because of the “inevitable inference” of animosity

the punishment is so undifferentiated and sweep that it outruns any legit goal

it’s so punitive across so many aspects of public life that there’s no way to see it but a bare desire to harm

here there’s an inference from the total failure of nexus that the purpose is discovered to be BAD


CON LAW DAY 5

first fifteen minutes:

Brown v Board

means-ends test

two different reasonableness tests

depending on how the law is classified, different tests

three big Equal Protection Clause questions

	1.  is this a suspect classification? (like race)

		if yes, no RB, strict scrutiny
		if no, rational basis review

	2.  is the end pursued by this law legitimate or permissible?

		this is a low hurdle

	3.  is the fit between the classification and the purpose rational?

		this is a low hurdle too

Rational Basis Review is easy to satisfy, it’s an expression of trust in the legislative process

MOST LAWS are subject to RBR

Beazer is the transit authority methadone case

all judges:  2.  safety and administrability are legit goals

all judges:  3. fit sucks

			the law is underinclusive and overinclusive.  it blocks safe users and allows in unsafe alcoholic


if there was a bias against the targeted group so that the legislature couldn’t be trusted, they’d use a different

but maybe there’s a racial classification lurking underneath?

are there any purposes that are illegitimate under RBR?

	a bare congressional desire to harm a group cannot constitute a legitimate gov’t interest

	there must be a reference to some public value in a justification of a law under review

	there must be some value that transcends the discrimination in the law

	“bare desire to harm” doctrine only applies in the world of rational basis review

		how can we tell between bare desire to harm and a legit purpose?

			legislative purpose, legislative history, court’s invented purposes

US Dept of Ag v Moreno fails the legit govt purpose test

	you can’t just punish hippies outright

Cleburne fails the fit test

	group home blocked, even though other relevantly similar buildings allowed

	fit between means and ends is totally irrational

Romer v Evans broad, sweeping penalty imposed on a sweeping group is bare desire to harm

	colorado blocks protections for gay people

	something funny is going on


the court will go looking further afield to see if its just a bare desire to harm when there’s a bad fit

the court will go looking for desire to harm when there’s a big disability imposed on a group

THE COURT UPHOLDS JUST ABOUT EVERYTHING UNDER RATIONAL BASIS REVIEW

DONE



TODAY:


How related?

Minnesota v Clover Leaf Creamery

MN makes a law prohibited sale of milk in plastic containers and allowed it in paper

the environmental reality is that both are shitty for the environment

	Classification: from law, methadone use
	Class: the group itself, methadone users

1. suspect classification?

	(milk packaging types.  plastic and paper)

	NO

2. legit gov’t purpose?

	(environmental protection says court. promotion of local industry suggests legislative history)

	YES

		laws sometimes state there own purpose.
		otherwise it can be pulled from the history.
		also courts invent purposes.

3. suitable fit?

	THIS IS WHAT THE CASE IS ABOUT


actual empirical evidence suggests that paperboard is worse for the environment

there’s no empirical connection between the means and the end


DOES ‘CONCEIVABLE’ INCLUDE EMPIRICALLY TRUE?


it’s actually an economic protectionist measure

this, according to Bybee, is a legit purpose

	[although, isn’t it forbidden under the dormant commerce clause?]

its stated purpose is not its actual purpose


this is not empirically valid.  actual purpose not stated publicly.

means and ends don’t fit. they’re actually antithetical.

what happens then?

should the legislature be punished for having a secret purpose?


the supreme court accepts the stated purpose.

for them rational = conceivable

legislature doesn’t have to prove it

it only has to be debatable that there’s a relationship

	fit doesn’t have to be perfect: Beazer argument.

	but it’s not debatable.  all the facts show that prohibiting paperboard is worse.

		should the court go fishing for a real purpose?


As long as there could have been a legit goal, the court won’t strike down the law.

the supreme court will look to actual purpose but only in the rarest cases.

unless you can force the court to accept that the stated purpose was DEFINITELY NOT one of the purposes, they won’t look to other possible purposes

they’ll generally go with the stated purpose

they do a beazer-style: it’s fine even though it’s not perfect.

MN law upheld.

MN legislature has no reason to be biased about plastic.  We can trust them.  RBR.  PASSES.



	POLICY PRINCIPLE BEHIND RATIONAL BASIS REVIEW:

	Why does the court trust MTA to decide about methadone, but not about race?

		because the political process will protect a popular class like methadone users
		BUT NOT AN UNPOPULAR CLASS LIKE [INSERT RACE]

		MAJORITARIAN POLICYMAKING WILL PROTECT



RAILWAY EXPRESS AGENCY v. NEW YORK


	NYC advertising restriction on trucks hired to advertise

1. classification is based on who owns the truck.  not racial

	therefore RBR

2. is the end legit?

	goal is to promote traffic safety
	LEGIT PURPOSE

3. is the fit rational?

	it just needs to be conceivable, not empirically true
	if goal is to promote safety by reducing distractions, this is sloppy as hell
		there are other distractions in NYC
		the means do reduce distractions and promote safety, but it misses SO MANY OTHER distractions
		(not antithetical like in clover leaf) the means don’t hurt the stated purpose
		just waaaay underinclusive

STILL, THE COURT UPHOLDS THIS LAW

why is it ok to legislate toward one little segment?

just like leg doesn’t have to show to the court its empirical validity (that’s clover leaf) and doesn’t need to be the best possible policy (that’s beazer) the legislature

RAILWAY EXPRESS: THE LEGISLATURE DOESNT NEED TO ATTACK THE WHOLE PROBLEM AT ONCE

they can go incrementally

there’s no unpopular nature of advertising trucks, so for deference’s sake we can believe that the leg will go back and fix all this if it’s really a problem

WE’RE COLLECTING RATIONALES for why laws should be upheld

	[closer analogy between the classification and race, more likely the court is to jump out of the RBR world]


so far, the only way to get a court to overturn a law under RBR is to identify a BARE DESIRE TO HARM


WILLIAMSON v LEE OPTICAL

law prevents plebs from fitting lenses into glasses etc

opthamologists = MD
optometrists = D
optician = dork

this law harms opticians

1. not race. RBR
2. end goal legit?

	uhhh, what’s the purpose???
	looks like maybe to protect the degree-holding eye folks
	perhaps also to harm the opticians
	the law pushes business through big shops and professionals
		is this just protectionism?
		…the court claims the goal (beyond mere protectionism) is…
		the court doesn’t search for actual purpose
		they just settle for less
		they accept that there might be some reason for the distinction between optician and ophthalmologist
		the leg can regulate public health under the police power with almost complete impunity
		they have no evidence that this will promote public health
		but they don’t need much to stand on

	an ophthalmologist might make a quick eye exam during a glasses fitting.

	therefore it’s permissible for the leg to mandate that MDs do glass fittings

	to serve the goal of promoting public health

	it doesn’t matter whether this actually helps health (Clover)

	it doesn’t matter if this is only a sample of the total fix (Railway)


WILLIAMSON v LEE OPTICAL:  the legislature need not even supply a purpose

the court says, well X could have been the purpose, so you’re fine.

the court just asks, is there a state of facts where the purpose we dreamt up could be served by the law?


	if the court can supply a purpose pretty much anywhere, why didn’t it in Romer, Clover, etc?


    CON LAW DAY 6

    RBR is a means-ends test

    bare desire to harm fails ends

    loose fit might fails the means

    the loose fit is also evidence of the lack of legit ends (moreno, cleburne)

    clover leaf: available means say means subverted the ends

    	still, court said fuck it.  as long as there’s a debatable connection between means and ends it passes

    MN v Clover: pltfs argue the lack of an empirical relationship means that the stated purpose and the actual purpose don’t quite match

    	the court doesn’t feel like working too hard to find the actual purpose, so long as the stated purpose is not totally insane

    	as long as it’s conceivable, the court will accept the stated purpose

    	is this about the impossibility of determining legislative intent?

    		no

    		it accepts it under the banner of deference

    		the court won’t be skeptical of the legislative process under RBR

    		it accepts on face value what the leg says

    the traffic safety case showed us an example where the court completely invents the legislative end

    the court also says that the fit doesn’t have to be perfect.  the means needn’t tackle all the ends.  the means needn’t even tackle the most severe bandwidth of the problem

    the leg can pick an area, target it, and the court will just say ‘oh they’re just tackling the problem one step at a time.’

    the leg doesn’t even have to go back and follow up on the rest of the problem

    williamson v lee optical

    	court invents the purpose for a law

    	the court is just like, it’s a health law

    	since the end is health, the means of routing business through opthamologists is legit

    doesn’t have to be empirically sound, effective, complete, etc.  the court will supply all this

    this is an EXTREMELY deferential test

    the requirements are loose and low

    and then on top of that, the court has developed all these politic doctrines

    they have consistently shown that they’ll bend over backwards to find a way to make it work


    moreno, cleburne, and rimer got struck down

    why?

    are they really outliers?

    was it really just a bare desire to harm?

    was the court unable to invent a justification beyond animus?


    OR


    was there some other factor going on?

    is it about the popularity (or lack thereof) of some class?

    where there’s a suspect classification, the court is not so deferential

    at the other end of the spectrum is RACE

    race classifications in a law trigger strict scrutiny



    TODAY’S CLASS

    back in time

    back to the 19th c

    the formal doctrinal tests didn’t exist back then

    the first few cases aren’t very “doctriney”



    Strauder v West Virginia

    1880  post 14th, but before plessy

    the court looks at a case where the black guy has been convicted by an all white jury per a WV law that excludes all but white males

    the court starts with an examination of the state of the black man following reconstruction

    the extent of the problem determines the extent of the remedy under the 14th

    the court says ‘they are mere children’

    they’re in a subordinate condition despite the abolition of slavery

    the 14th is made to fix this

    the 14th guarantees equal protection

    but, kind of like in plessy, this decision says they’re only getting political equality from the 14th

    	there is no right to have proportional representation on your jury at your trial

    	but

    	this case is about categorical automatic exclusion of black people from a jury

    what kind of harm is created by forbidding black people from a jury?
    what kind of harm is created by having no people of your own race on your jury?

    there’s a pervasive prejudice, but that’s not at issue here

    that’s not a constitutional problem

    the constitutional problem is forbidding access

    the court doesn’t care about crafting an unbiased jury

    they only care that people of a certain race are denied access to equal protection

    merely saying that blacks can’t serve on a jury puts a brand or stigma on the black folks


    the problem is the stigmatic harm of a law blocking black people from serving on a jury


    the mere exclusion places a brand of inferiority

    it’s not concerned with equality of outcome, merely equality of opportunity in a limited space


    can strauder still face an all-white jury?

    hell yeah

    but

    theres no stigmatic harm there

    because there’s no official exclusion


    so what about de facto separation/exclusion?  still stigmatizing?

    stigmatic harm, according to plessy and strauder, only stems from inequality in the political sphere

    no stigma, no branding in the social sphere


    the court stops at the limits of the 14th and clears up the denial of access problem

    it can’t stretch out and touch outcomes


    the court allows exclusion from a jury of women, poor folk, the uneducated, etc

    these really would allow the leg to exclude black folk by using laws that distinguish us on other traits

    even those traits that correlate very tightly with the very trait the gov just forbade


    using race places an unconstitutional stigma

    using education does not place a stigma

    so the gov can still sort us out the way they want more or less

    but one way is permitted and one is not


    Strauder is more egalitarian than plessy and way more than scott

    but still this is not remotely universally egalitarian

    this case is just about the stigma of denial

    not about fair case outcomes


    it’s constitutionally permissible to stigmatize the uneducated, but not the blacks


    the reasonableness std from plessy is overturned by brown

    but before brown



    KOREMATSU v UNITED STATES

    gives us a new way to look at race legislation

    japanese americans and people of japanese ancestry got a curfew and then got booted off the west coast

    per a military order

    korematsu was arrested for not leaving his home

    “most rigid scrutiny”

    a “pressing public necessity” can justify the use of racial classifications

    	strict scrutiny:

    		1. race based classifications
    		2. compelling gov interest
    		3. narrowly tailored means-ends fit

    pressing public necessity means compelling gov interest
    most rigid scrutiny means purpose must be important and fit must be tight

    the court says they tailored the fit as close as was possible under the emergency circumstances

    the court sets up ‘close fit’ as a std for strict scrutiny

    they don’t draw on the plessy “reasonableness test”

    they beef up the RBR test

    the end pursued here is national security

    	its WW2 and they’re afraid of invasion and espionage and sabotage

    	these are sufficiently important goals, compelling gov interest

    we are definitely discriminating on the basis of race

    but we’ve got these super important goals

    THE ENDS TEST IS SATISFIED

    so fit?

    (this is a historical sticking point, i suppose)

    there was a military necessity.  some maps weren’t loyal.  war is hell.

    UPHELD


    even though it’s upheld, it sets up SS


    they claim there’s no stigma involved here


    2. sufficiently important purpose
    3. sufficiently close fit

    UPHELD


    MURPHY dissents

    he talks about something like RBR

    he wants to look for a legit end and “some reasonable relationship between means and ends”

    it doesn’t have to be watertight or empirically demonstrated

    murphy wants to apply this “RBR” because it’s wartime

    nonetheless, he would strike this down

    he considers the ends to be totally legit, naturally

    HE OBJECTS TO THE FIT

    the relationship between the means and ends fails because he sees more or less a bare desire to harm

    he says all we have to support this is fear and prejudice (yada yada slander)

    he points to some more fit problems:

    this is radically over inclusive (sweeps up innocent japs)

    it’s also under inclusive (ignores potentially dangerous germans and italians, etc)

    so MAJ applies a higher level of review and UPHOLDS
    the DIS applies a lower level and would STRIKE


    JACKSON dissents

    he does a kind of Harlan-in-plessy thing

    he doesn’t want to require the military to be super reasonable like the MAJ or somewhat reasonable like the DIS

    he doesn’t want to military to be rational.  he wants them to WIN

    he says the judiciary has no business judging the military

    he wants to get out of the analysis biz

    he says let the political process do the job

    this is like harlan saying ‘lets not judge the reaonsableness’ we should be colorblind
    (lets not judge reasonableness during wartime, we should step out)

    both harlan and jackson say that when the gov uses race, the court should not explore it’s reasonableness

    harlan and jackson point to paths NOT TAKEN

    the court stays involved in wars and race analyses

    no majority has ever endorsed colorblindness as a doctrine

    the future of the doctrine was choosing between a lower and higher standard of reasonableness




    LOVING v VA

    married couple runs afoul of virginia’s anti-miscegenation statutes

    the issue is whether this violates equal protection

    q1: is race a classification in the law?

    	yes

    q2: does the law serve a compelling gov’t purpose?

    	the purpose is to ‘preserve racial integrity’ etc

    q3: do the means match up closely?  [eventually it will narrowly tailored]

     	tbd


    VA claims this is equal protection because blacks are equally forbidden from marrying whites and vice versa


    they want the means to be ‘necessary to the accomplishment’

    	this means essential
    	this means there are no alternatives

    ‘of some permissible state objective’

    	this doesn’t sound like SS
    	more like RBR

    so this case doesn’t yet pair up our normal group

    the mix and match RBR end and SS fit


    the court says racial integrity is not a suitable gov’t end

    also, it’s not well made

    a better, more comprehensive approach to racial integrity would involve denial of marriage between white and chinese, chinese and black, etc

    	incidentally, this law allowed native women to marry white men

    one view: this law fails because there is a “curable” failure to address other races

    but

    the court says that’s not the case and this is incurable

    even if we tightened the nexus, it would still fail

    the test of end is just ‘some permissible end’ but the court doesn’t think that ‘racial integrity’ is not some permissible end

    we can’t just OK whatever you dream up, and we’re not going to dream something up for you

    we’re not quite there, but this is the origin of strict scrutiny

    the court articulates a tighter test for means-ends

    and it says, we’re gonna require a bit more from the ends test than we would in RBR


    is affirmative action subject to strict scrutiny?



    CON LAW DAY 7

    RBR covers virtually all laws

    exceptional cases get strict scrutiny or intermediate review

    strader v WV

    	1-  racial discrimination is different bc of the history of slavery. “mere children”

    		the whole purpose of the 14th is to address this subordination

    	2-  any kind of legal discrimination that implies inferiority is struck down by the court under the 14th

    		the stigmatic harm lessens equal enjoyment of rights and put former slaves back to childhood

    		excluding black from jury service is stigmatizing, and is therefore struck down

    	3-  this new egalitarianism has firm limits

    		the case is another one about political equality not social equality

    		the stigma is in the exclusion from the jury, not with what actually happens in a courtroom

    		no right to a proportionate jury, no right to equitable outcomes, just no FORMAL exclusion

    	4-  the court is not concerned about interactions between different kinds of classifications

    		the court doesn’t care if you block the uneducated, even if it means blocking all blacks

    		it matters how you build the law.  exclusion on one characteristic is fine, on another is unconstitutional

    	5-  general language of the 14th amendment is really targeted to the problem of racial discrimination

    		it deals with race, not with other hierarchies

    		it’s ok to exclude the unpropertied, to exclude women, etc

    		this case doesn’t prevent WV from excluding blacks, it just stops them from doing so explicitly


    strafer told us the 14th was about protecting a disadvantaged group.  jackson in his dissent in korematsu tries to carve out a wartime exception to this.


    Korematsu

    sets up strict scrutiny

    1. is this a non-suspect classification?
    2. permissible end?
    3. relationship is rational?

    only the most pressing public necessity can justify using racial classifications

    the maj says the fit was close enough bc wartime

    the dissent finds the relationship irrational.  over inclusive, underinclusive

    korematsu points to important/compelling ends

    but

    it settles for a wimpy relationship between means and ends

    colorblindness:  a per se prohibition on racial classifications



    Loving v Virginia

    the zero point for strict scrutiny

    suspect classification?

    yes.

    then is the end compelling?

    yes.

    is the means necessary or narrowly tailored?

    if yes, then valid.  if no to either 2 or 3, then struck down.


    strict scrutiny often means invalidation.

    	affirmative action is the exception

    the “necessary test” is modern strict scrutiny

    the “permissible end test” doesn’t last


    the court says even a perfectly crafted version of the law would still be unacceptable because racial preservation is not a compelling government purpose


    Now, modern era.





    STRICT SCRUTINY IS FOR ALL SUSPECT CLASSIFICATIONS

    right now race is the only suspect classification

    we’ll eventually get a middle test for the equal protection analysis




    Washington v Davis



    this is about a reading comprehension test

    the classification on the face of the law (the test) treats people differently based on how they score on the test


    RBR means the law passes unless bare desire to harm

    SS almost always means invalidation

    so the argument really comes down to “consider this law a racial classification, please”


    here, they make the argument based on disproportionate impact


    but


    it’s not enough for the court

    DI is to be considered, but the court wants to see something more

    the court wants to see RACIALLY DISCRIMINATORY INTENT

    you can take a facially neutral test and the DI would not trigger SS

    if you can prove intentional racial discrimination, you can trigger SS



    the intent to discriminate can be inferred from the TOTALITY OF THE RELEVANT FACTS

    the inference requires hard work

    the court gets a lot of leeway in sizing up the totality

    in this case, the totality of facts do not support an inference of discrimination

    near the bottom of 541, affirmative efforts, changing racial composition

    between the totality of the facts and a permissible goal, the court upholds the racially disproportionate impact

    RBR applies, policy survives


    but


    why should we even do this?

    why do we need an inference of intent?

    	[in some instances, the court will accept mere disproportionate impact as in the case of jury compositions]


    WHY NOT just go with disproportionate impact?

    because it would be too disruptive to the precious status quo

    a disproportionate impact test would invite mountains of litigation under SS as opposed to the RBR that you could test them under now


    RULE:  DISPROPORTIONATE IMPACT IS NOT ENOUGH TO TRIGGER SS UNDER 14th AMENDMENT

    you need to show racially discriminatory intent from the totality of the facts

    disproportionate impact is necessary but not sufficient to trigger SS


    Stevens in his concurrence says dramatic DI alone should trigger SS

    also, he says a law conscripting clerics should not be voted down simply because an atheist voted for it

    	is one bad apple in the congressional bunch enough?






    McKLESKY v KEMP

    develops the doctrine of measurement of discriminatory purpose

    the baldus study:  you’re more likely to be killed for killing if the perp is black and the victim is white


    the court says RDI is not enough

    it’s not the whole puzzle

    we need to see discriminatory purpose

    but it needs to be more than just awareness of probable outcome

    it must be racially discriminatory purpose ‘because of, not in spite of’

    so you need to show RDI from the totality of the facts (Washington)

    you also need to show RDI that the leg had discriminatory purpose with the intent of the racial impact

    feeney test:  BECAUSE OF, NOT MERELY IN SPITE OF

    they have to pass the law at leafs in part because they want that racially DI to occur.

    THIS IS A NARROW DEFINITION OF PURPOSE

    you have to show policy makers wanted the DI

    easiest way to trigger SS of a facially neutral statute is to show DI

    	court rejects, wants DI to be buttressed by totality of facts

    this court raises the bar higher

    	you need more than awareness of RDI, you have to show they passed the law BECAUSE they wanted RDI

    this insulates even more laws than the ‘totality’ test from washington


    the court also cites slippery slope crap because they’re afraid of disturbing the status quo

    ‘other categories could speak up next!’



    BRENNAN dissents and says that the history of georgia means that you shouldn’t have to show purposeful DI

    this is the new plessy because it insulates racially terrible laws from meaningful judicial review


    he says the majoritarian chorus should be interrupted by the courts.  he doesn’t buy it that the legislature is the fix

    he says the slippery slope argument sucks because it suggests a fear of too much justice



    washington and mcclesky gives us a map for how to get a facially neutral law to trigger SS



    Adarand v Pena

    it’s the end of a long line of important cases that we don’t read

    historically, laws that used race on their face were designed to maintain a racial hierarchy  (korematsu, loving)

    what happens to a law that uses race on its face, but is meant to remedy the racial disparity?

    what happens to affirmative action laws?



    the federal gov set up incentives for prime contractors for picking up subcontractors who are run by minorities


    from adarand on, laws that use race on their face get strict scrutiny

    even laws with “good intentions”


    1-skepticism
    2-good intentions and bad get same SS
    3-same standards under 14th and 5th


    but isn’t it a little goofy to equate the plessy laws with these paternalistic laws



    brennan, stevens, ginsburg:  no SS for AA (one extreme),  AA should get RBR.



    majority (in the middle): everything is subject to same standard.  SS is the tool we use to smoke out invidious discrimination.  SS itself separates.



    thomas:  SS so strict that it would invalidate any use of race.  he want SUPER SS to amount to colorableness

    	he says outright that there’s a constitutional and moral equivalence between good and bad intended laws

    	he doesn’t like the stigma of, those races can’t get by without our AA

    	(other extreme)



    ginsburg:  we need enough rigor in our application that even when lawmakers says they’re helping disadvantaged groups, they still get reviewed, but don’t get struck down


    the majority says that there will be a different mode of applying SS to AA as compared to SS for other facially neutral statutes with RDI
    CON LAW DAY 8

    1. suspect basis?

    	if non-suspect, then RBR
    	if suspect, then SS
    		facially neutral statutes can still be subject to SS
    			where there is a showing of a racially discriminatory purpose
    			the purpose is inferred from the totality of relevant facts
    				one relevant fact can be racially disproportionate impact
    					RDI alone is usually not enough
    					some J in a dissent says it can be enough on its own
    			to allow mere RDI to trigger SS would throw a lot of our favorite laws into litigation
    				the court warns of a slippery slope that leads to governmental paralysis

    mcclesky v kemp

    	tells us decision makers must have more than mere awareness of RDI
    		m v K requires that the policy makers enacted the law because of the impact, not in spite of

    	awareness of RDI alone is not enough, even if proved
    	the unexplained is not presumed discriminatory
    	you have to show more than systemic discrimination
    		mr death row would have to show that he was discriminated against individually
    		he’d also have to show the group of people who did that discrimination
    		without individuals discriminating and individuals being discriminated against, no case

    	slippery slope argument comes up again
    		they’re concerned about what other studies might shake the foundations of crim law

    	dissent: slippery slope argument is nothing more than a fear of too much justice


    In Beazer, the court said methadone users can lobby congress themselves without running a risk of being denied a fair shake by the legislature

    it’s all about whether you can get a fair hearing from the leg.

    	if you can’t, the court might give you SS

    the court sends mcclesky back to the legislature

    	we have no reason to believe that people complaining about the structure of the criminal justice system 		could not go to the leg and get a fair hearing

    the dissent in beazer spoke up and said that methadone users were sufficiently unpopular that they need help

    exam method: determining suspect classification: apply mclesky and washington


    adarand v pena

    	also a SS case

    	explores a different domain of SS

    	It’s an affirmative Action case, it mentions race right in the law

    		its not facially neutral

    		but

    		it has “good intentions”

    		so

    		should it still be subject to strict scrutiny?

    	AA is about breaking down the existing racial hierarchies

    		should this result in a different standard of review?

    		no

    	AA cases still get SS

    		the good or bad intentions of the law do not determine the std of review

    	the court defends this on the basis of consistency and congruence

    	rationale:

    		maj is in the middle

    		scalia and thomas say AA is equivalent to Jim Crowe laws

    			they’re stigmatizing and awful

    		stevens says the laws are different, and that there should be a different level of review

    	Adarand turns out to be a defeat to both sides

    		the court applies SS but does so in a way that SS can be satisfied in the context of AA

    	the maj says we apply SS, but we won’t always invalidate them

    		we’re going to apply SS in a way that leads to the upholding of AA

    	why have a strict scrutiny lite?

    		the reason why is that they want to be able to smoke out invidious discrimination

    		they want to sort out the good laws from the bad laws

    		they think the application of SS will separated good AA from bad AA

    		they use it not for categorical invalidation (like thomas and scalia would do)

    		they don’t decide to toss SS for AA (like stevens would do)

    	THE MAJ splits the difference

    		we will use SS like S and T want

    		but we’ll use it to uphold SS like the liberals want

    			ginsburg likes the middle ground because it blocks the korematsus but allows the adarands

    	Adarand is the culmination of the debate as to whether AA should get SS

    		it says yes, but water it down


    TODAY:

    	MORE AA


    	Adarand liberal view is the old one

    		it acknowledges the disadvantaged position of black folks

    		they see the 14th as designed to address the situation of blacks

    		this is like strauder v WV

    		problem is out there, and the law is used to address it

    	the conservative view

    		the problem is in the law, not out in the world

    		their approach to stop RD in life is to stop GOV RD in law

    		they claim the gov introduces racial conflict



    Grutter v Bollinger

    	U Michigan law school admission policy was to do a holistic analysis

    		they look to grades etc and soft factors

    			they admit that their favorite soft factor is race

    	does the policy classify on a suspect basis?

    		yes. race and ethnicity

    		so, we’re in SS land

    	is this a compelling governmental purpose?

    		it’s not as important as national survival (korematsu) (def CGP)

    		to remedy past discrimination is a CGP

    		here, we’re dealing with a university

    			the court traditionally has given deference to universities in determining their own academic policy

    			they give the deference on the grounds that they’re experts in education

    			AND academic freedom is a first amendment issue

    				they don’t want to be too skeptical and end up walking on first amendment guarantees

    		there’s something new here: when we look for a CGP with universities, we put a thumb on the scale

    	their goal/purpose is to reach a diverse student body with a critical mass of minority students

    	why is this a CGP?

    		1- this is compelling bc law schools are social institutions that create our leadership class

    			we need our leaders to be diverse because a diverse leadership class is more legitimate

    			this is a bit like brown’s rationale

    		2- this is a compelling purpose bc diversity enriches the educational experience

    			these in-class benefits legitimize the purpose

    		3- deference bonus to a university

    	THIS RECIPE GIVES A CGP


    	Is there a close fit between the means and the ends? narrowly tailored? necessary? nexus?

    		just because we have an important end, doesn’t mean the law passes

    	reasons why it’s narrowly tailored:

    		-it’s not a quota system

    			a quota says, we take x number of af ams

    			here, its individualized and holistic

    			that shows use of race is part of a broader system that’s designed to achieve true diversity

    			they’re not doing outright racial balancing

    				that doesn’t meet the closeness required for the end of true diversity

    		-there aren’t other suitable systems

    			if there’s nothing better, then its narrow

    			if there’s no other method that is free from racial classifications, it’s narrow

    			if the other methods aren’t workable, they don’t count

    			no workable race-neutral means available? then this system will do.

    		-O’Connor sets up a time limit for the school

    			a sunset provision goes a long way toward narrow tailoring

    			in 25 years, RD will be gone and we will do away with this system


    	This is another case that’s a loss for everyone

    		Ginsburg says you can’t wrap up hundreds of years of RD with 25 years

    		Kennedy doesn’t like this wimpy-ass SS

    			he’d like to see it applied more tightly

    			he says we have nothing better right now

    				but

    				being really tough on SS would make the admins work harder at coming something up

    			he wants tight SS not because he wants colorblindness (like S and T)

    			he’s a bit different.  he’s not opposed to AA on principle

    			instead, he’s channeling Adarand

    				he says strict SS would incentivize innovation

    				the admins would have to hustle to make better systems

    			he wants to use SS to smoke out the bullshit, and to use SS to promote innovation

    “the plural of anecdote is not data” -KB

    		Rehnquist:

    			the ends are critical mass of diversity

    			you can’t really mean that because you’re race balancing

    			if you need a critical mass, you’d want 150 natives, 150 hispanics, and 150 blacks

    			instead, you’ve got proportions that match population demographics

    			therefore, your end is really quotas

    			you’re not actually contacted to your claimed ends in the means you chose


    		Scalia and Thomas

    			the end is bullshit

    				this kindergarten ‘play nice’ BS is not a CGP

    			we’ll have endless litigation and pervasive AA

    				if this is an acceptable end, it’ll start turning up everywhere

    			he’s criticizing the end


    		Thomas and Scalia

    			the means are nonsense

    				he says to let in everyone who passes the basic test

    			he says that you don’t even need a law school

    			having a law school is not a CGP

    			having and elite law school is not a CGP

    			they’re not interested in SS, this is racial paternalism

    				the school is run by racists, the scotus is racist

    				they think blacks can’t hold up on their own

    			the fact you don’t choose a race-neutral system is that you don’t really value diversity

    				you think minorities can’t hack it


    GRATZ v BOLLINGER

    	chancellor syeverud was an expert witness in this litigation

    	this one gets struck down

    	it’s a points system

    	1- suspect classification

    	2- CGP

    	3- narrowly tailored


    	This is suspect classification

    	the purpose of pursuing diversity is taken as a CGP

    	the problem pops up at the narrowly tailored level

    		the twenty point bonus for minority students amounts to a sure thing

    		this functions like a racial quota, accruing to the maj

    	the means are the point system, it works like a quota

    		is it a quota? dissent says no

    		if it is, so what?

    			the quota doesn’t produce the full diversity you claim to seek

    	rehnquist strikes this down on narrow tailoring grounds

    		this does not rule out all point systems

    	Souter and Ginsburg say the court doesn’t like the transparency of it

    		but in grutter, the court said let’s go ahead and openly address race

    			-makes education better

    			-makes our leader factory system more legit


CON LAW DAY 9

AA is tricky from a doctrinal perspective because of the history


problem one:  what standard to apply?

	ADARAND: like any policy that classifies on race, AA is subject to SS

		but they complicated it:

			it’s not exactly the same as SS in other contexts

		ever since Loving, the court has typically struck down laws that it applies SS to


Law school case:

CGP:

	demonstrable education benefits and leadership farming mean that “critical mass” racial diversity

		IS A COMPELLING GOVERNMENTAL PURPOSE

	this is only because it’s getting a boost on academic freedom grounds

	SCALIA and THOMAS never accept diversity as a compelling government purpose

		S says its too vague and diffuse

	KENNEDY also rejects this account of purpose because he doesn’t like the deference


FIT:

	must be narrowly tailored or necessary

	AA cases get a little more leeway

	means are individualized holistic analysis including race

	this law partly uses race to classify

	this kind of screening is connected tightly to the production of the kind of diversity the school wants

	eliminating alternatives:

		no other workable options, no race-netural solutions

		the percentage plans don’t preserve merit or achieve diversity

	SUNSET PROVISION:

		goes a long way toward claiming that this is narrowly tailored

		imposed by the court in the opinion.  25 years

DISSENT:

	it’s not really so sophisticated

		the 12 natives, 50 hispanics, and 100 blacks correspond to demographics

		a critical mass would be the same for each race

		you’re actually racially balancing



TWO VARIETIES OF EACH STD OF REVIEW:

RBR: full deference, and bare desire to harm
SS: full skepticism, and AA SS (SS lite)



GRATZ:

	bookend to grutter

		policy is struck down because of insufficient narrow tailoring

		points for race are determinative of admission

		you’re getting mere racial and ethnic diversity

			not the true diverse diversity you claimed to want

	what’s the harm of this looser fit?

		it’s still producing diversity after all

		what’s wrong with a quota?

		SEE RECORDING.  RECORDINGS BEGAN TODAY.


THE COURT AGREES ON APPLYING SS

	but justices fall between:

anti subordination view	————————————————————————————     colorblindness



PARENTS INVOLVED v SEATTLE

	the synthesis of BROWN and AFFIRMATIVE ACTION

		we’ve got student assignment on the basis of race

		and

		voluntary programs designed to ameliorate racial disparity

	THE COURT APPLIES STRICT SCRUTINY

		is it the tougher or the weaker SS?

[Roberts writes for the majority sometimes and the plurality sometimes]

	1. Racial classification, so SS
		race is a tiebreaker for student assignment

	2. COMPELLING GOVERNMENT PURPOSE?
		they’re not remedying, as in the past (this is CGP, but AA don’t do that)
		they’re not striving toward true diversity (as in grutter, this is also CGP)
		the court is not willing to accept racial balancing, which might be what they’re doing here
		even if we did accept racial coming together as a CGP, maybe still a no go on narrow tailoring

	3. NARROWLY TAILORED?
		indefinite racial balancing is not narrowly tailored
			no commitments to the endless use of race!
			FAILS PERMANENCE
		if you just keep on sorting students this way, it’s not narrow
		other means are potentially available to accomplish this end, like building schools in border towns
			those don’t use race as a classification, they’re workable
			FAILS ALTERNATIVES
		you’re not even using race enough to actually accomplish your goal
			these are only tie-breakers

THESE POLICIES FAIL BOTH NARROW TAILORING AND COMPELLING GOVERNMENT PURPOSE


DISSENTS:

Stevens takes the anti-subordination perspective

	he hates the colorblindness attitude

	he recognizes that brown wasn’t about white kids rights, it was about black rights

		he references the historical racial hierarchy of white over black

	he wants a more deferential application of SS

BREYER takes the deference from GRUTTER and applies it to elementary school

	he says that there is a CGP and the means are narrowly tailored

	minimal use of race here is analogous to UMICH LAW

	just enough to achieve the goal, which is life in a diverse society



CONCURRENCES:

THOMAS:

	this is just like the segregation laws from the old days

	any use of race demeans, any use of race is unconstitutional

	HE WANTS COLORBLINDNESS

		without gov use of racial discrimination, there’d be no real problem with race in society

	he would have per se invalidity of laws that classify on race

	he settles for SS, but would apply it thoroughly.  No SS lite for AA for Thomas


KENNEDY:

	says the constitution is not colorblind

	colorblindness is an aspiration, he claims

	keys in on the de facto/ de jure distinction

	he claims there’s no meaningful difference between racial harms resulting from law and social racial harms

	KENNEDY swings.  HE IS ALL OVER THE PLACE.

	he’s not about colorblindness, and he’s not with stevens

	he likes diversity as a CGP, even where it’s not the UMLAW style

	anti-subordination: the problem is in society. handling the problem with racially aware laws is ok

	K: i want race neutral policies to be explored

		what harm is created by the current configuration?

		there’s a stigmatic harm (like in brown) that results from formal exclusion of af ams from X

		even this minimal use of race stigmatizes

	he won’t accept the means of his AS colleagues

	[washington and mcklesky connection:  you can show a discriminatory intent by inferring it from totality]

		he thinks they should be using facially race-neutral laws

			but, they’d still be subject to SS because of the W+M totality test

			he would exempt them, though

	GRUTTER applies SS in diluted form

		kennedy wants to force them to use race-neutral means

		but wants to let them have (positive) discriminatory purpose

		he’s stuck on race-neutral means because of the STIGMATIC HARM

	SCRUTINIZE RACE, but DON’T DENY RACE AWARE MEANS TO LEGISLATORS


PARENTS INVOLVED:  SS in AA context.  introduces us to KENNEDY’s middle way.





FISHER v UNIVERSITY OF TEXAS

	Sotomayor wrote a blistering dissent here (it’s in Schuette)

		Both cases get at the discussion about AS v CB

		Breyer approached kennedy and brokered a deal

	upheld, and sent back, and now the court is hearing it again


UT admissions policy adopted the “top ten percent law”

	race is used as a mechanism for sorting out the rest


the lower court should have stopped the law in its tracks on the grounds that it was not narrowly tailored


SCOTUS:

	deference on compelling gov purpose (GRUTTER)
		bc academic freedom

	but same narrow tailoring test for any AA (FISHER)
		bc stigmatic harm risk



This case is a tweak on existing doctrine ^



SCHUETTE v BAMN

it’s kind of an AA case

it’s about whether you can amend a constitution to block AA legislation

	[even the CB folks will accept using race to remedy past RD]


ARGUMENT ONE:

	impact is not enough to trigger SS. discriminatory intent inferred from the totality of circumstance does.

	we do not have intentional discrimination here

	what would be bad about denying much the right to amend its constitution?
		its not intentional RD
		if we struck it down, you’d be ascribing to minorities a political interest
		to do so would reduce minorities to their race

	they don’t want to inject racial thinking

	[Kennedy is closer to colorblindness than AS]

	the court would be saying: we think its in the interest of racial minorities to have AA

		to do so would reduce them to their race

		to reduce them to their race imposes a STIGMA

	We can’t be telling [black] people what’s in their interests


ARGUMENT TWO:


	popular sovereignty

	if the class orders pizza, and prof makes it subs, it sucks

	being denied here is not only a loss of power, but a loss of dignity

	taking away a sensitive topic from the public is stigmatizing.  it robs dignity

	We can’t be telling [sovereign] people what’s in their interests

	it’s not a law that would be stigmatizing, it’s the court’s behavior


SOTOMAYOR’S DISSENT:

	it’s an AS perspective

	the problems of race are already in society

		we should be permitted to legislative remedies

	SOTOMAYOR doesn’t see the decision as a triumph of democracy like the MAJ

		she says, there’s nothing neutral about this decision

		there’s hierarchy present.

			this case sits in line with the cases and laws that reinforce the mechanisms that allow it

			this is part of the “baking in” process that abets racial discrimination





CON LAW DAY 10


Parents involved:

SS applies any time you have a racial classification

	we don’t have to make a washington style case for it, because the law uses race on its face

Compelling interest?
	-remedying past discrimination?
		doesn’t work here.  both districts have unitary status
	-diversity?
		goal not available here.  genuine diversity is not being pursued here
	-end racial isolation
		lets assume arguendo this is a CGP

STILL

the laws would fail on the grounds of narrow tailoring

	-horizontally:  there are no other usable means
		here, there were other workable means

	-vertically: there’s a real relationship to the stated goal
		here, you’re really racial balancing
		that doesn’t really end racial isolation
		your means are stigmatizing because they reduce students to their race


the court adopts a colorblindness perspective

	-RD is not juts out there, it happens because the gov splits us racially
	-it’s just like brown.  it’s stigmatizing


Stevens and Breyer are the ANTISUBORDINATION crew

	they look at the racial hierarchy and say we need to work to straighten all this out
	this is about whites oppressed blacks
	the problem is in society
	the gov should be empowered to end the social problem of hierarchy and isolation
	also
	he’s satisfied with the vertical relationship, and thinks there’s no other means
	minimal use of race, product of experimentation
	he’s satisfied in the narrow tailoring

Kennedy (prof’s favorite.  EXAM)

	closer to colorblind, but he’s in the middle
	he accepts ending racial isolation as a compelling gov’t purpose
	he is different from the AS crew because he does not accept the means
	he likes the vertical fit, but doesn’t accept the cost
	the cost is the stigma
	‘you can have a race-conscious purpose, but you should pursue it through race-neutral means.’
		this is different that the grutter compromise
		grutter accepted a race-conscious purpose, but it’s present alongside many other traits
	Kennedy wants to get these schools out from under SS
	He would have no SS here at all. exception to mcklesky and Washington (inference of intent from totality)
	Here, despite the intent, kennedy wants to give them leeway
		they should be able to intend race ends, but as long as they use race-neutral means
		they should be free from SS

Fisher v Texas

	lots of anticipation.  not a big decision.  it’s on the docket again.
	refined AA jurisprudence
	SS still applies
	diversity is still a Compelling interest
	university gets some deference in what counts as a cgp
	court does not defer on narrow tailoring
	court wants to try race neutral alternatives
	court cares about actual achievement (vertical)
	and they’re still stigma-conscious
		too much race is determinative.  reduces kids to their race. too much stigma
	strict colorblindness doesn’t apply
		it wouldn’t allow AA
		there’d be no AA SS analysis, it would just be per se invalid

Schuette

	Scalia is concerned about sovereignty
		overturning the constitutional prohibition on AA would be a big step away from CB
		to step in here would invalidate Washington v Davis

	Sotomayor has a strong AS attitude
		problem is out there
		empower the gov to handle it
		racial hierarchy is already present
		the decision by michigan is part of a long line of perpetuating racial hierarchy
		the latest action gets analyzed under the history of hate

	Kennedy takes a middle approach again
		he’s more on the side of colorblindness
		doesn’t want to see the court reducing anyone to race
		to strike the amendment on the ground of disproportionate effect would speak for minorities
			that would be the court defining them on their behalf
			it’d be saying ‘here’s your interest’
			this is mad stigmatizing to K
		it would demean the voters as a whole too
			it’d be like saying, ‘you can’t handle race’
			you can’t make reasonable decisions about race, ya racists
		[he has never voted to uphold any AA.  he’s always concerned about fit/narrow tailoring/stigma.]



Beazer (methadone)

	justification for deferential RBR was that methadone users were sufficiently likable that
	they could appeal to the majoritarian policy makers
	if the users don’t like the courts decision, they can go back and lobby for a change
	judicial skepticism is reserved for exceptional groups with unpopular traits

	are there other groups that should get some heightened judicial skepticism?

	if there are, why that trait?

	what level of scrutiny do they deserve?

	structurally identical to RBR and SS, goldilocks standard


TODAY:



Frontiero v Richardson

	paperwork burden falls on female service members
	this law classifies people differently based on gender

	is this a suspect classification?
		if yes, SS
		if no, RBR

	Brennan decides for the plurality that it should fall to the SS side

		why?

		It’s like race structurally and historically

			historically, they both couldn’t hold office, bring suit, own property

				there’s an analogous denial of rights (actually even longer history of discrimination for women)

			it’s also similar to race in that it’s an accident of birth and it’s immutable

				a legal burden should bear some relationship to individual responsibility
					you’re fucked for what you do, not who you are

			critically, it bears no relation to the ability to perform or contribute to society

		The court sees a tight analogy to race
			-shared history of discrimination
			-same nature of discrimination
				immutable characteristic
				unrelated to contribution to society

		The history analogy works for women
		but men were not disadvantaged
		they did the discriminating
		so, should we do the same for laws that burden men?
		these justifications only for work for laws that burden women

		one take: laws burdening women get a tough look
		another: laws burdening either gender disproportionately get a tough look

	AS: gender burden history means women get preference
	CB: genderblindess gets both sexes get same treatment


	FRONTERO maps out how we decide whether some law gets strict scrutiny

			EXAM:  some new trait is a lot like race? then SS
					fails that? RBR


	is there a compelling gov purpose?

		reducing paperwork burden.

		administrative convenience is not a CGP for SS
			in Beazer, it was a a legitimate goal under RBR

	no compelling gov purpose, DONE.  YOU LOSE. GOOD DAY!

	they put on the brakes to wait and see what happens with the equal rights amendment
		but maybe that sucks
		because the decisions of the legislature doesn’t affect the courts job
		they’re supposed to be the voice of the voiceless


Craig v Boren

	OK regulates alcohol consumption

	women can buy 3.2 beer at 18.  men can only buy at 21.

	classifies on gender

		Intermediate Review:

		goal: important gov objective
		means: substantially related

	important sits between RBR and SS for govt purpose
	substantially related sits between rational and narrowly tailored


		traffic safety is a permissible/legit goal (we know this from railway express agency)
		traffic safety is judged an important govt purpose

	how about means?

		court cites some studies.  there’s some relationship, but it’s tenuous
		the law doesn’t work.  it doesn’t prohibit consumption of beer, just sale of it.		any kind of alcohol will cause drunk driving, this only gets at 3.2

			[one step at a time a la railway does not work under intermediate scrutiny]
			[this law would survive RBR]

		the evidence from the plastic/paper MN case showed their law was actually contrary to goal
			that was fine under RBR

		the evidence’s weakness here is meaningful, though (IS > RBR)

		the statistical difference between men and women doesn’t work for the majority

			the number of arrests don’t reflect the actual incidence of drunk driving

			gender stereotypes are at work here about damsels in distress and drunken dorks

			the statical disparity that created the law may have been itself a product of stereotype
				the law is a product of generalization.  the statistical difference is product of generalization


		Intermediate review says you can’t just use stereotypes

			you gotta show empirical validity to the stereotypes


		you apply IS to see a tight fit, but also to make sure that the law is not rooted in over broad stereotypes

		there might be some truth to the law

			men can be reckless, more than women

			but the court won’t let the leg simply assert that as true

				the court demand more than stereotypical thinking

	gov can use gender as a classification

		but

		only when the data really shows that it’s worth it

			if they can prove it, go ahead

			if it’s just a product of stereotypical attitudes, it’s a no go

		smoke out the reasoning with IS


	The court applies IS instead of SS because it thinks gender can be useful more often than race

	Gov can use gender more than race.  Why?
    CON LAW DAY 11

    intermediate review

    frontiero

    	handled gender with strict scrutiny (analogy to race was core)

    Analogy:

    	1- congress’s behavior (?)
    	2- history of discrimination
    		women were denied the vote like blacks
    	3- nature of the discrimination
    		immutable characteristic being used as a basis for distribution of benefits and burdens
    		the characteristic bears no relation to an individual’s ability to contribute to society

    the court will eventually see gender as a more acceptable basis for classification than race
    	but less acceptable than a lot of other traits


    Q1: how does the law classify?

    	-non-suspect:  ophthalmologist v optometrist, methadone user
    	-quasi-suspect: gender
    	-suspect: race

    Q2: is the governmental goal legit?

    	-non-suspect:  legitimate/permissible
    	-quasi-suspect: important
    	-suspect: compelling

    Q3: is the fit legit?

    	-non-suspect:  rationally conceivable
    	-quasi-suspect: substantial
    	-suspect: narrowly tailored/necessary


    RBR: bare desire to harm and standard
    IR: naked IR and “exceedingly persuasive”
    SS: generic and AA


    leg must put up good reasons for a law that discriminates on gender

    reckless young men / naive young women stereotypes animate the OK 3.2 beer law

    incrementalism etc won’t fly under intermediate review

    ‘you behave differently when your truck is for hire than when you’re driving your own truck with ads’

    	this kind of generalization would not fly under IR


    THERE’S TWO “flavors” of each level of review

    craig v boren: rehnquist: between RBR and IR


    IR CONTINUED


    US v VIRGINIA

    how does the court apply IR to smoke out over broad archaic gender stereotypes?

    how do we spot a stereotype?  what separates it from the traditional gender roles?

    VMI is a public college.  best in VIRGINIA.  one of the best overall.

    they’re put on the spot by the lower courts.  they create a women’s college as a substitute.

    so theres two questions:

    	-original constitutional violation
    	-is the VWIL a sufficient remedy

    COURT APPLIES IR

    	-important gov objective?
    	-substantially related?

    THIS CASE ADDS “exceedingly persuasive justification”

    	this applies to both purpose and fit

    	this is a boost to either fit OR (fit and importance of purpose)

    	this still lands in IR, but it’s a beefed up version

    	relative to SS:

    		in ADARAND, the court said they’d apply SS in such a way that it could be satisfied

    			they wanted to permit use of race for good reasons (not “strict in theory, fatal in fact”)


    COMPELLING GOV PURPOSE?

    	diversity in education is not a important purpose here because it’s a post-hoc invented justification

    	cultivation of citizen-soldier leaders is accepted as an important purpose (but it later fails fit)



    Why only men?

    	fundamental differences between women and men

    		the adversative method: lack of privacy, radical equality (of misery)

    	the women couldn’t handle it
    	VMI would have to adopt watering-down privacy facilities
    		it would rob VMI of their edge



    FIT?

    	Vertical fit:

    		experts say some women could make it through the physical rigor
    		the law is under inclusive because it excludes all women, when it should allow in some who can
    		the law is over inclusive because it also allows some men in who can’t hack it

    			over inclusion and under inclusion can be a problem in RBR if there’s tons
    			less will do the job here

    		so what’s the policy really about?

    			generalizations about the way women are

    		there’s an imperfect relationship between the means adopted and the ends pursued

    			not perfect is OK under RBR but here it suggests Stereotypical Thinking about men and women


    IS VWIL a sufficient remedy for the problem here?

    	no

    	VWIL doesn’t stack up in terms of tangible and intangible features both

    		not materially equal, not equal in reputation

    	BUT

    	if they were equal, would the court have accepted VWIL?

    		possibly.  the court allows some use of gender.  citizen soldiers are acceptable as a purpose.

    		the problem here is fit

    	so

    	what’s problematic with the creation of VWIL in terms of fit?

    		it’s the same over broad generalizations that inform the remedy

    			the VWIL program was created around ideas of how women are

    			not all women would fail VMI, not all women would want VWIL curriculum


    	the court wants to see a better fit before they accept the goal


    there are single sex educational systems that would work

    	the gov could set up a single sex school to increase the breadth of educational choices
    		(diversity of education)

    	the gov could assert ‘diversity throughout the system’ as a goal (if they really meant it)

    	the gov would not want to advance ‘cultivation of citizen soldiers’ as a goal

    		the court would be suspicious and would seek out your real reasons


    VMI/VWIL classifications are archaic and over broad.  court won’t have it.

    loose empirical fit.  inability to come up with more arguments to support their policy.


    SCALIA’S DISSENT

    	this is not a stereotype.  it’s an ideal for men to aspire for.

    	these are not invidious discriminations, they are gender ideals.

    	he thinks the court should be free to pursue them.

    the court disagrees

    	you can only pursue an ideal that uses gender if you have a shitload of evidence




    VMI WAS COMPELLED TO ADMIT WOMEN

    	required to radically reinvent itself

    UMLAW WAS ALLOWED TO KEEP IT’S POLICY

    	thomas was pissed!


    exceedingly persuasive: IR with teeth



    NGUYEN v immigration and naturalization

    	immigrant commits a crime

    	he wants to claim citizenship because his father is a citizen

    	but dads don’t have the same rights as moms

    this policy treats people differently on the basis of gender

    	quasi-suspect classification

    we apply INTERMEDIATE REVIEW
    	(exceedingly persuasive: important governmental purpose, substantial relation)



    WHAT’S THE GOV PURPOSE?

    	-ensuring a biological relationship between the citizen parent and the child

    		FIT
    		moms are present at births, so less trouble to make connection
    		but DNA tests are available, why not say congress shoulda used DNA testing
    			(they could go: moms have no burden, men have to file docs.  OR they could use DNA)
    		SS: If there are alternatives, the fit prong is failed because there are other means.  not necessary.
    		Here: ‘everyone take a DNA test’ is gender neutral and shows biological relationship
    			congress can give this options a nix because it’s expensive
    			(this is like beazer and its ‘administrable’ assertion)
    		the court will accepts administrative reason here in IR land
    		the vertical fit: it’s decent
    		the horizontal fit: there are better options

    	-ensuring the citizen parent and foreign child has a true parent child relationship

    		accepted as important

    		FIT

    		alternatives:  both parents should file reports on how meaningful the relationship is

    			but
    			this is intrusive, cumbersome, etc

    		so again, the court agrees the alternatives don’t make sense on administrative grounds

    		what does the court say about invidious discrimination/stereotypical thinking?

    			-these aren’t based on broad generalizations
    			-this is a biological fact
    			-the nature of women is such that it justifies this difference in treatment
    			- a biological fact underwrites the policy, not a stereotype
    			-the difference between men and women in this context is real


    	Requiring both parents to file paperwork is hollow neutrality


    DISSENT:

    	a stereotype has a kernel of truth, but it is over broad

    		the stereotypical thinking is not about the biology of birth

    		it’s about who is the natural parent

    	OCONNOR applies ‘rigorous IR’

    	she doesn’t like the administrative convenience argument

    	the fact that the gov turns down DNA testing suggests something else drives the decision

    	not just women giving birth

    	but an assumption that men are naturally not parents and women are naturally parents


    Requiring both parents to file paperwork would show that you didn’t have stereotypes in your mind when the law was created


    CON LAW DAY 12


    EXAM dec 18 (last day of exams)

    be ready to attend his “office hours” review sessions


    GENDER = INTERMEDIATE REVIEW


    compensation for past gender discrimination is a suitable government purpose for IR

    genuine diversity is for the benefit of everybody.  you can use race or gender to craft a law that benefits all.

    “exceedingly persuasive” pushes IR toward SS

    some justices want SS for gender anyhow

    	frontier, three elements of analogy

    		-history of discrimination for race and gender both
    		-nature of the discrimination.  immutable and irrelevant to contribution.
    		-political branches have recognized inequality and have legislated to remedy it

    analogy to race made up the frontiero argument.  US v VA backed this up.

    the court was not willing to accept justifications invented during litigation

    	the diversity of education options justification was rejected as post hoc

    citizen soldiers were a suitable goal

    	but

    	that’s no excuse to only permit men


    so, the court thought there wasn’t really any solid rationale, merely old attitudes about men and women


    VA produced some rationales, all shot down by court

    the court said women could very well rise to citizen soldier status

    	love of learning, patriotism, etc are all available to women


    SS tough, or SS AA

    RBR bare desire, or RBR super deferential

    IR tightened: VA
    IR relaxed: Nguyen


    there are some real differences between men and women about birthing

    	more real than women needing paternalism (craig v boren)
    	more real than cooperative attitudes (US v VA)

    women are in fact different than men

    congress should not be penalized for accounting for the differences


    also there are administrative reasons

    	-DNA tests too expensive
    	-proving relationships too invasive
    	-too many foreign babies sired by american boys

    the administrative reasons are OK because they’re underwritten by a legit reason

    admin convenience is all you need in RBR

    IR says AC is not enough, usually

    but if you can show a legit difference, you can use AC


    how can you tell the difference between stereotypes and real differences?

    	rigorous application of IR

    		it smokes out the over broad archaic stereotypes

    			if the gov can’t provide evidence that its purpose is important and that its means are subs. related

    			then they were probably animated by some stereotypical thinking

    			without good reasons, the best explanation is stereotyping


    at the end of Nguyen v INS, the court applies IR in a relaxed fashion

    	it comes after US v VA, but does not overturn it

    	the SAME TEST COMES IN TWO FLAVORS

    		the two flavor system comes from the courts suspicion about streotypes


    heightened review = anything above RBR (in other words, IR or SS)




    TODAY, back to Romer and Cleburne

    why were these classifications kept in the category of RBR?

    in cleburne, the court says, no SS.  intellectual disability belongs in RBR

    in romer, the court doesn’t bother to decide whether sexual orientation belongs in RBR or IR

    	some lower courts say suspect, some say quasi-suspect, some say RBR



    ROMER v EVANS

    court overturns amendment 2

    court applied RBR and found a bare desire to harm a politically unpopular group

    	(moreno, romer, and cleburne are our three “bare desire to harm” cases)

    colorado says ‘we’re not burdening gays, we’re just putting em back on the same level as everyone’

    	they deny that there’s a harm here. they claim that they’re leveling the field. taking away preferential treats.

    	the court objects to this.  A2 is too sweeping, comprehensive, and far-reaching, they say.

    	lots of states have protected lots of people from different treatment on the basis of many characteristics

    	SO

    		everybody else has some basis for protection from the state

    		here, with A2, Colorado has placed gays below everyone else

    		you’re not leveling, you’re burdening

    		this is not a sure thing, but maybe this would place colorado gays outside RBR

    		A2 might even make gays outcaste

    		it would mean complete freedom for policymakers to hammer on gays

    		this is definitely a burden.  it might be a radical burden.


    	any equal protection analysis:  we first ask about whether the classification is suspect

    	then, in IR we check to see if there’s an important governmental purpose, in RBR it’s “permissible GP”

    	gov purpose here: to protect freedom of association and to conserve resources for fighting “real discrim”


    	THE COURT DOESN’T EVEN DIVE IN

    		they don’t apply even RBR

    		they say the case defies any equal protection analysis

    		they don’t even check for a permissible gov purpose or a fit between means and ends

    	THIS LAW IS NOT EVEN IN THE BALLPARK

    		it’s just pure animus


    	so, they don’t do a frontiero (history of discrim, nature of discrim) analysis

    		they don’t tell us whether gay is a suspect, QS, or non-suspect classification

    		they don’t get to it because the law is so fucked


    SCALIA’S DISSENT

    	would he go SS, IR, or RBR?

    	he think gays are not politically unpopular


    	scalia’s moral dissaproval argument

    		traditional attitude is that gay kills families

    		he thinks homosexuality is relevant to your ability to contribute to society

    			this contrasts to race and gender where there’s no relationship to contribution to society


    		he sets up an analogy to polygamy

    			we traditionally opposed it

    			not just because we don’t like them

    			but because we think it will hurt society

    		he says that there are legitimate grounds for rationally opposing gay

    			he says gays are politically powerful

    			he says gay is not irrelevant to contribution to society

    				this is not disapproval for the sake of disapproval

    				this is like disapproval of murder

    					both murderers and gays harm society, according to scalia

    			he sees this as a war between the political block of the gay folks and traditional americans

    				he doesn’t see gays as needing protection

    					they get more than a fair shake at representing their political interests

    				he sees this as a mere political battle between competing moral attitudes

    					he sees a battle between the “rugged honest people of colorado”

    					and the legal elite like us law school folks

    			he sees a battle between a small elite group of radical folks and the bulk of people

    			he wants to let this political arm wrestling match to be left on its own

    			it’s fine for either side to win democratically

    			just don’t come crying to the court if you don’t like the outcome


    		The majority doesn’t battle against this argument because they see the burden as monumental



    CITY OF CLEBURNE v CLEBURNE LIVING CENTER

    	city refused a variance for a group home for retardeds

    	the court decided this was a bare desire to harm case

    		they found no explanation but fear


    	why is it that intellectual disability is only subject to RBR?  analysis:

    		there’s a history of discrimination against retardeds

    			the legislature have addressed some retarded problems, so they’re not politically powerless

    			the retardeds are like methadone users.

    				the court has no reason to believe they won’t be given a fair shake by policymakers

    		 there’s an immutable characteristic that the court sees is highly relevant to ability to thrive

    			there’s a real difference between retardeds and normals to contribute to society


    		therefore, the analogy to race fails.


    	the majority of the court goes through the analysis, and finds the case belongs in RBR

    		still, the law fails because its animated by a bare desire to harm


    	[frontiero plus rimer plus cleburne] gives us a method

    		it shows us how to analogize a trait to race

    			if it’s close or far, that tells us which standard we should use


    	BE PREPARED TO DO THIS ANALYSIS ON THE EXAM

    	BE PREPARED TO DO A RDI ANALYSIS ON THE EXAM


    romer and cleburne do double duty

    	they flesh out bare desire to harm

    	they help us decide whether a classification is suspect, QS, or NS

    		They provide an escape route

    		they can decide a case without determining which std to apply


CON LAW DAY 13

three levels of review

RBR, IR, SS

each has two versions

the more a classification is like race, the more likely the court is to subject that law to heightened scrutiny

ROMER

Scalia says gays aren’t like race.  they are a minority, but they’re well represented.

	they don’t deserve a higher level of review, for him

	the court should trust that the results regarding gays are the product of a fair political process

	he’d use only RBR

	the maj did not engage with that argument

	he says its fair to discriminate because   gays are like polygamists

They said it was such an insane law that it was a bare desire to harm case, violative of RBR

	how does the court decide to do a BDH analysis, instead of the deferential std of clover leaf

	one of the differences is the unusualness of the discrimination

		if it is unusual, its more likely to be BDH

	another difference is the magnitude of discrimination

		it’s super sweeping here


Cleburne

	the court makes an explicit analysis, comparing retarded to black

	they think retarded is not like black

	the retardeds land in RBR

The analogies:

	-the nature of the discrimination is not like race

		there are relevant differences between dumb and smart

	-the history of the discrimination is not like race

		there’s some sadness, but also a bunch of ameliorative legislation recently

		the policymakers are sympathetic and listening

	-recognizing retarded as a candidate for heightened review would open the floodgates

		age, infirmity, etc might be subject to SS or IR

		slippery slope


		Some of these same arguments might also apply to gender, tho… but they get a different conclusion

			-partly because the slippery slope arg doesn’t work

				(this often makes a difference for the court when they’re worried about implications)

				(RDI triggering SS would subject many laws to SS.  Washington.  they don’t do it)

				slippery slope is a shitty argument

				maybe you’re just afraid of too much justice


	WHY didn’t the court majority make the formal argument in ROMER?

	why not formally land it in one of those categories?

		maybe because they’re worried about the slippery slope

			they can’t foresee all the consequences, and don’t like the ones they can see



    TODAY

    14th: DUE PROCESS

    	one way to see it: the state must follow whatever rules it sets for everyone

    		this is important but minimal.  can allow for proper enforcement of unjust laws.

    		the procedural side is thin

    	does the 14th get at any substantive protection?

    		do they have to be good rules that respect liberty?

    	what is the substantive content of the 14th amendment?

    		how does the court enforce it?

    	did you follow the rules?  do you have appropriate rules?

    		Re: the substance of the word liberty in the 14th amendment

    	there’s a historical move from economic ‘liberty’

    	toward

    	a right to privacy


    THE SLAUGHTERHOUSE CASES

    	what is the substantive content of the 14th amendment?

    	why do they focus on the liberty portion of the test?

    	FOLLOW THE RULES + THE RULES MUST RESPECT LIBERTY

    	intentionalism, textualism, and ‘historical analysis’ all crop up here

    	early historical case helps to set the stage.  does not provide a lot of doctrine.

    	first interpretation of the 14th

    	P&I case

    statute by LA legislature grants a monopoly to some corporation

    pltfs object on every possible grounds

    	THE COURT says the 14th has a specific overriding purpose of ensuring the freedom of the slave race

    	THE COURT emphasizes the purpose over the text (every [black] person)

    	we focus on the privileges and immunities clause

    		which also turns up in art 4 section 2

    		each citizen gets the privileges and immunities of the several states (state level)

    		but

    		the 14th protects the privileges and immunities of the citizens of the UNITED STATES (federal level)

    			this language ended dread scott in a sense

    			but also preserved it in a sense.  it preserves the difference between state and federal citizenship.

    			a total reversal of dread scott would say: there’s only one citizenship.

    		Art 4 says, states can’t exclude outsiders from the protections they give to their own

    			it’s a requirement of equity across state lines

    			it does not get at the protections they must offer

    		the substance of the P&I of state citizenship are [listed on 731] the basic fundamentals. life, lib…

    		Art IV requires evenhandedness between insiders and outsiders

    		Art IV does not require states to give all, or even any of the classic suite of P&I

    		federalism was a big issue, so they wanted to let states decide this shit for themselves

    			the powers of the fed gov are enumerated

    			but otherwise it leaves the states free to use and enjoy their massive police powers

    				in whatever way they see fit

    				subject to

    				these fringe limits in the constitution

    		the XIV amendment upset the apple cart of federalism a bit

    		it gives the feds oversight over the states


    are P&I of US citizenship = P&I of state citizenship?

    	the court says they have to be different

    	they have to be different classes of P&I because the feds must respect state sovereignty

    	if the 14th guaranteed the same P&I as the ART IV P&I, then the 14th would vastly empower the feds

    		they’d be able to come down to the state level and check to see if the states were abridging P&I

    		if feds PI = state PI, then TYRANNY, destruction of sovereignty of the states

    		it would put too much power into the hands of the federal gov

    		you cannot destroy federalism!

    	state protections are big and basic like life and property

    	federal protections are weird and specific, like the right to use seaports

    		all the good stuff is in the state PI bucket, not much is left for federal bucket

    		but they must be different, or else feds become police over states

    	the case says:  “the fourteenth is all about freed slaves, and its meaningless.”

    		the meaning of the P&I of federalism has been winnowed down to nothing

    		there’s not even litigation about it anymore, because no one thinks they mean anything


    THE DISSENT sees the federal P&I were not so limited as the majority described

    	they saw a meaning to liberty that was much more substantive

    	they saw economic rights that should be protected by the feds

    	they see the right to one’s labor and property as totally fundamental

    	they see a due process protection of substantive economic liberties

    		they see a protection from state regulation

    		they want to let the court scrutinize state laws restricting economic liberty

    		up until the new deal, the court checked to make sure that states weren’t stomping on liberty

    			economic liberty was the substantive heart of the 14th for a while


    LOCHNER

    DUE PROCESS CASE

    NY bakery statute limits hours per day and hours per week

    	State police power lets the state regulate anything related to health, safety welfare and morals

    	wide goals, pretty much any means allowed

    		subject to a few federal limits (such as art. IV same for instates and out of staters)

    	here, the court is concerned with economic liberty, freedom to contract

    	the court says they can imagine a law that would restrict hours that would be a real health law

    		they see limiting hours on coal miners as legitimately related to health

    		they see limiting hours on bakers as only thinly related to health

    			here’s how the ‘its a health law’ argument works:

    				-the work itself is dangerous to worker
    				-the work product becomes dangerous to consumer

    		the court is not saying, you can’t pass labor-health laws

    		they’re just saying, you gotta pass our scrutiny

    	the court would allow a law if the law affected a group that was unable to consent to a contract

    	but bakers are adults, they’re not stupid or weak or in need of special help

    		court upholds a workplace regulation regarding women in 1908

    		they thought they needed help

    	adult bakers are red blooded men, who are not wards of the state

    	the court thinks they don’t need special protection

    	bread doesn’t get dangerous in the 11th hour of baking

    	this is not like mining, there’s no health threat.  bakers are not in need of state babysitting.


    the court won’t allow the state to just pass a law to make bakers happier

    	a law like that would obliquely impact health safety and welfare

    	but it is an exercise of the police power that must balance out against individual liberty

    	they make a slippery slope argument

    		they don’t like the idea that after bakers come candlestick makers, and then EVERYONE

    		the idea of proliferation of regulation made them quake

    		we live in the world that the majority feared

    this is a means-end test

    	any police power goal will fly

    	any reasonable means will do

    BUT

    	any law that touches on economic liberty must be demonstrably reasonable

    		they require fair, reasonable, and appropriate

    			this is a bit like RBR

    		but a higher bar for means-end fit

    		the state must show a better fit


    SO, according to the court, this law is not about health

    	instead, in the absence of a CLOSE AND DIRECT relationship to health

    	this is really about regulating the hours, not about health


    the court sees the word “liberty” in the due process clause as protecting freedom of contract

    	the state cannot abridge your fundamental right to contract


    BUT your liberty to contract can be taken away IF DUE PROCESS

    	but due process is not just procedural

    	it’s also a requirement for the state to respect the substantive meaning of the liberty in question

    	just because NY used proper process to enact this law doesn’t make it OK

    	because they took economic liberty


    THE court protects fundamental liberty of citizens against states by requiring states to show that their regulations are reasonable and appropriate

    	it requires a close and direct relationship between means and ends


    14th amdnmnt due process requirement protects economic liberty by requiring a close and direct relationship


    The dissenters:

    	Harlan and Holmes


    	Holmes:  liberty in the constitution should mean what the majority thinks it means as reflected in laws

    		he thinks the court should not be in the business of defining liberty

    		he thinks the majority is in the business of politics, inappropriately

    		he wants the majority’s dominant understanding enforced by the court


    	Harlan:  it’s not the duty of the court to ask why the legislature enacted it

    		he’s generally with the majority

    		he can see a reasonable basis

    		he thinks there’s empirical evidence for the health connection

    			they live short lives in pain.  worse than mining.

    		he thinks we should be more deferential to the states

    		this is prophetic of the study-dense “brandeis brief”

    			this is the mechanism of deciding Brown v Board



    THE COURT DRAINS THE 14th OF MUCH OF ITS POWER IN THESE CASES

    	they’re part of a national effort to make sure that black stayed subordinate

    they blocked economic regulations back then

    they don’t anymore


    CON LAW DAY 14

    implied fundamental rights

    	14th privileges and immunities must be different from state P&I
    		federalism requires that there’s different content
    		Art 4 leaves a lot of autonomy to the states
    			it requires them to share with everyone what they give to their own
    			it does not demand anything substantive

    		the states P&I are super clutch
    		the fed P&I are lame like right to use waterways

    		there’s not a lot of P&I litigation from the 14th ever since the slaughterhouse cases

    		the dissenters were concerned with economic liberties.  they lost but they forecast.

    		the slaughterhouse cases reaffirmed the contextual nature of the 14th

    			it’s about remedying the past abuses and making sure former slaves can get it

    		14th is for former slaves.  P&I of federal citizenship is meaningless.

    	Sec 1 of the 14th amendment has SOOOO MANY clauses (equal protection, P&I)

    	the idea of liberty in there contained within it substantive rights

    		due process requires not only following any old set of rules

    		due process also contained substantive guarantees

    		liberty to contract was a big one back in the day

    		we hate allowing power to private folks now

    	On one hand, the state has police power to pursue broad goals

    	In the lochner era, the court allowed states to regulate contracts, but has to pass a reasonableness test
    		they had to show a legit health safety welfare morals goal
    		they had to show a close and direct connection between he means and ends

    		this is a requirement overall that a state’s police power be fair, reasonable and appropriate
    		this is a pretty high hurdle for a legislature

    		Lochner’s “health” law didn’t pass because they thought it wasn’t really a health law
    			(they saw a labor-hours-regulation goal)

    		this bears a family resemblance to the heightened review standards from our equal protection classes

    	The court saw itself as beating back state regulations for the sake of fundamental personal rights


    	Holmes and Harlan dissented

    		one objects on factual grounds (baking really is dangerous!)
    		one objects on democratic grounds (let them have their law!)

    		they disagree with the standard of reasonableness (legit goal, solid means)
    			they think if it’s debatable, you win
    			the maj thought if its debatable you lose

    		they both articulated a more deferential std
    			neither wanted the court to scrutinize regs that interfere with rights to contract


    	Plessy had a std of reasonableness for the use of race:  not a targeted annoyance, customary, real goal

    		this was a “reasonable racist” std
    		loving v WV raised the bar a great deal (strict scrutiny)



    TODAY, we start with a tough std of review (Lochner) and we see the court lower the bar

    	the bar that was high in lochner will be on the ground by Carolene



    TODAY



    Home building and loan v blaisdell

    	impairing the obligations of contracts (MN pauses mortgage market in response to depression)

    		the framers passed the contracts clause to prevent debtors from skipping on their obligations

    		BUT the court upholds the moratorium

    	the state can law to serve the health safety welfare and morals

    	they’re limited in this power by the contracts clause of the constitution (which protects rights of individuals)

    	how do we sort out the relationship between the constraint and the power?

    	A contract cannot act a shield from legislation that is otherwise valid under the police power

    		(you can’t contract to serve exclusively raw chicken)

    		if we allowed contracts to trump the police power, the state would be paralyzed

    		traditionally, it was understood that when you make a contract, all the laws existing are baked in

    	You can’t contract in a way that defeats the police power

    Sutherland dissents:

    	he disagrees over the extent of the police power

    	everyone agrees the state can regulate dangerous stuff (even when its under contract) like vodka

    	sutherland wants to limit it to inherently dangerous things, in contrast to the majority who are fascists


    Hughes for the majority:

    	the interest of the state is much broader

    	society and economics have radically changed

    	contracts aren’t ever really personal to parties anymore

    	the state has in interest in almost all personal contracts, because they affect everyone else

    	we’re a community full of people who are only incidentally individual

    	congress can do things that aren’t listed in the constitution, so long as it serves some constitutional goal

    	he is anti-originalist and he says things have changed and now we don’t have to follow the constitution

    	home building drained the contracts clause the way slaughterhouse drained P&I


    		lochner set a high std of reasonableness RE police power interference with contracts
    			(constrains police power with this high bar)

    		home building v blaisdell lowered the bar
    			(explodes police power with low bar)

    			THIS CASE CASUALLY CHANGES THE MEANING OF THE CONSTITUTION

    			it seeps in to the rest



    NEBBIA v NEW YORK (same year as blaisdell.  cracks are showing)

    	NY milk price fixing law

    	depression sent milk prices spinning

    	can a state committee set prices on milk?

    		[from a Lochner perspective:

    			milk is essential for health
    			close and direct fit?
    				price controls are not really related to illness
    			No you cannot pull this shit]

    	Nebbia’s standard of reasonableness: not unreasonable, arbitrary, or capricious

    		end: consistent with due process
    		means: real and substantial relation

    	Lochner: show us how this is fair and reasonable
    	Nebbia: we’re gonna check to make sure this is not unreasonable

    	Lochner demands demonstrable fairness
    	Nebbia is way more permissive and deferential


    West Coast Hotel v Parrish

    	court upholds: some law sets up a minimum wage for women

    	this court just outright denies tat there is a freedom to contract

    	this changes the presumption from:
    		fundamental right to contract, with some interference in rare dangerous places
    		to:
    		regulation is ubiquitous, anything thats not crazy is fine, there is no right to contract

    	the court spells out some reasons justifying the regulation
    		-women are weak
    		-women need protection
    								`Aside: (this might not fly under IR these days)`
    		-the state has an interest in unequal bargaining situations
    			if the court doesn’t step in, the community will have to foot the bill for these fine women

    		its not just a problem for the starving worker, its a problem for the whole community who has to support
    			if the court doesn’t step in, the gov/community is subsidizing the unscrupulous employers
    	We live in integrated communities (Blaisdell)
    	there is no fundamental right to contract (Nebbia)
    	reasonable here just means NOT CRAZY (West Coast)



    US v CAROLENE PRODUCTS

    	congress prohibits the transportation of “filled milk”

    	they invalidate a whole slew of contracts

    	this is congressional regulation, so not 14th but same standards

    	the court looks to “rational basis”

    		you have to look to the facts
    		then you close your eyes and flush your mind
    		then anyone can come up with any set of conceivable facts

    	LEGISLATION AFFECTING COMMERCIAL CONTRACTS IS NOW PRESUMED CONSTITUTIONAL

    	any imaginable set of facts that could justify the law will allow it to pass a constitutionality test

    	p775 footnote four:  we now only give meaningful judicial review to our favorite categories

    		775 gives the courts enumeration of what they’re willing to protect

    CON LAW DAY 15

    Death of LOCHNER

    it’s about the court’s relationship with state police power
    the Lochner court is skeptical about the use of state police power

    they saw a fundamental right to contract
    	they were very skeptical about legislation that limited it

    	= judicial constraint on police power


    high level of reasonableness req of leg by court is the LOCHNER position

    the demise of the lochner era:

    	court changed its understanding of state police power

    		no longer the court’s attitude that there was a freedom to contract

    		no longer req a reason from the state

    		regulation, not freedom is now presumed to be the default


    THEY CHANGED THEIR POSITION ON POLICE POWER AND LIBERTY TO CONTRACT

    	we’re in a shifting morass of what’s considered a “fundamental right”


    case evidence for all this:

    BLAISDELL: different vision of the police power (they pause the mortgage market to remedy depress)

    	contracts get police power read into them
    	the state can always constrain or invalidate a police power

    	now, because of densely organized society:
    		the state has lots of interest in our contracts

    		reading the police power into our contracts now allows the state to fuck with our contracts
    		whenever it deems it to be reasonable to do so, and even when it’s not totally reasonable


    NEBBIA:

    	liberty to contract is dropped from jurisprudence

    	new standard:  you only have to show that the law is not IRRATIONAL
    		no longer do you need to prove that it is rational


    WEST COAST HOTEL:

    	there is no such thing as freedom to contract

    	there is a broad police power frequently used

    	we’re going to get out of the way of the state

    	any justification will work now for the court, so minimum wage is no problem

    	it’s not just about protecting women, it’s about protecting anyone with unequal bargaining power

    	since these contracts can affect the whole community, this is all ripe for regulation

    	police power gets a boost parallel to the abandonment of freedom to contract


    CAROLENE PRODUCTS:

    	as long as there’s any possible set of facts that would support the policy maker, we’re fine

    	no requirement of clarity

    	no requirement of connection

    	full-on deference

    	you now trust the policy-making process to make regs that work for the majority

    	now, only groups unpopular with the majority will get heightened scrutiny

    	the two-tier review system comes from Carolene in footnote number 4

    		the court will still do heightened review, just not in the old places

    		the court will still give a hard look at laws that regulate discrete groups

    		the court will still look hard at laws that change the rules of the political game

    		when some fundamental interest is at stake, the court will give closer scrutiny

    			(this used to be contracts, now it’s about the first eight amendments/bill of rights/ 14th)

    		they will be very deferential to most legislation

    			but burdens on protected classes will get a hard look

    			and laws affecting fundamental rights will get a hard look

    				BUT WHAT RIGHTS ARE THESE?

    				AND WHAT LEVEL OF REVIEW?

    			How do we know if its a fundamental right, and if it is, how will the court protect it?

    			what level of reasonableness will the court demand?


    	our path:  equal protection, then back in time, contract protection analysis, then it dead ends, births EP


    TODAY:

    	we look at the implied fundamental rights

    	lochner is in the past, but it’s still a cautionary tale


    SKINNER v OKLAHOMA (1942)

    	OK statute makes a three strikes law that winds up with sterilization

    	this law, on its face, classifies on the basis of number of certain crimes committed

    		3 thefts: vasectomy
    		3 embezzlements: no vasectomy

    		if an employee of the bank steals 20 bucks three times, no sterile
    		if a stranger steals 20 bucks three times, sterilized

    	under generic equal protection RBR, this would fly

    		its a decent goal, there’s a conceivable (if imperfect and incomplete) relationship

    	BUT the court does not apply RBR because the leg is dealing with a FUNDAMENTAL RIGHT

    	right to procreate is not listed in the constitution but it is a FUNDAMENTAL RIGHT

    		we know its a fundamental right because the consequences of not having the right are huge

    		if the gov took it away, whole groups could be wiped out

    			THIS BECOMES A STANDARD METHOD

    				(what would happen if we didn’t have it.  if it’s horrible, then the right is fundamental)

    			this is an outcome-oriented analysis of fundamental rights
    			it expands the footnote 4 list of bill of rights fundamental rights

    		since this could lead to the extinction of a people, so it’s a fundamental right

    	SO THEY USE STRICT SCRUTINY INSTEAD

    		this fails strict scrutiny because the OK leg makes no effort at evidentiary support
    			the court expects justifications and won’t come up with them on their own

    		they don’t explicitly use our doctrine because it doesn’t exist yet

    	IN SKINNER:  just because freedom of contract is gone, implied fundamental rights are gone

    STONE’S DISSENT:  court is being dishonest

    	due process is radioactive right now in 42

    	they don’t want that discussion

    	he says the proper home for this right is in liberty in the due process clause

    		the court doesn’t link right to procreate to the due process clause but rather EP


    SAN ANTONIO SCHOOLS v RODRIGUEZ

    	TEXAS school tax system results in disparate outcomes

    	EP ANALYSIS:

    		classifies based on tax base, allows wealthy districts greater control
    		this is a non-suspect classification, so RBR

    		there’s no history of wealth discrimination
    		the wealth discrimination is not the result of an irrelevant immutable characteristic

    		THE POOR ARE NOT A SUSPECT CLASS

    		NO HS UNDER EP

    	FUNDAMENTAL RIGHT ANALYSIS:

    		education is asserted as a fundamental right to education

    		the court says that there is NO FUNDAMENTAL RIGHT TO EDUCATION

    			because there’s no textual basis for it in the education

    			there’s no implicitly recognized right to education because there’s not a strong enough nexus

    				education is related to first amendment rights and right to vote

    				but education is not tightly enough wound together with a listed right

    				you got to right to the BEST SPEECH or the MOST INFORMED VOTE

    			SO this falls into RBR

    		two different lines of analysis both land this case in RBR (unlike skinner)

    	SO, RBR analysis for this law:

    		purpose of the law is allow localities to choose their level of sacrifice, to promote local control

    			-this is a permissible government purpose

    		rational conceivable relationship here?

    			-there is some relationship between the goal and the method

    				(truck signs: one step; wrong: clover leaf)


    	no suspect class?  no fundamental right?  then you’re in RBR land

    	IF YOU WANT TO UPHOLD THE LAW, you wanna be in RBR land

    		if you get there, you only have to be wary of a bare desire to harm


    	NO MORE DISCUSSION OF SCHOOL FUNDING AT THE FEDERAL LEVEL as of 73, but still at state level


    	If the poor were a suspect class, this would have come out differently

    	what would happen if POOR was a suspect class?

    	the court had to block it from consideration as a suspect class because otherwise:

    		SLIPPERY SLOPE INTO THE OCEAN OF LITIGATION

    		if the poor were a suspect class, you’d be way buried in cases about tons of laws


    	what would happen if EDUCATION was a fundamental right?

    		there’d be mountains of litigation about it

    		we can’t afford that much justice!

    		education is so densely regulated.  if EDU is SC, then too too much litigation



    	“if i don’t have this fundamental right, look at these bad outcomes!”

    		v

    	“if you do have it, look at all these laws getting litigated!”


    	We’re learning new things, but we’re just hashing over all the old methods



    PLYLER v DOE

    	TEXAS wants to make illegal kids pay a tuition fee for public school

    	this law classifies on the basis of documentation

    		it divides the population on the basis of documented or undocumented status

    		this classification is non suspect

    			because it’s partly voluntary

    			and it’s not immutable

    			and it’s relevant to gov interests

    				the state can legitimately take documentation status into account

    				the gov can use this subject only to RBR

    		BUT THEYRE CHILDREN

    			its not the children’s choice

    			its outside the control of the kids

    			so this is not a voluntary act

    		does this change the status of the classification?

    			not sure

    		THERE’S STILL NO FUNDAMENTAL RIGHT TO EDUCATION

    			but

    			the consequences of absolute denial of education changes the rules of the political game
    				no one wants a permanent class of illiterates

    				this is like the analysis from skinner, where outcomes can make fundamental rights

    			THE COURT USES A SKINNERIAN ANALYSIS

    				they find there’s something fundamental about education after all

    				absolute denial of EDU makes it fundamental

    			so, we’re dealing with non-criminal kids and an important right


    	The court is not willing to settle for RBR here, but it doesn’t quite get to SS

    		THEY CHOOSE INTERMEDIATE REVIEW for this case
    			because its not quite a suspect class
    			and its not quite a fundamental right

    		They want another custom flavor of heightened review

    			the court should be open to a spectrum of HR, says BURGER


    SO, here we are at a quasi-intermediate level of review:

    	three purposes:

    		-protection from an influx of illegals
    		-undocumented kids deplete educational resources
    		-undocumented kids are less likely to remain in the state

    	NONE OF THESE SURVIVE THIS REVIEW BECAUSE OF A LACK OF SOUND EVIDENCE

    		under RBR this would almost certainly survive (BURGER)

    		he doesn’t object and say this law would survive the level of review the court chooses

    		he objects and says that the court shoulda used RBR and passed the law


            CON LAW DAY 16

            last time:

            what happens when the court looks at both due process/fundamental rights and equal protection?

            skinner v OK

            	court uses both lenses
            	but the doctrine isn’t all there yet

            	still, they look at fundamental rights and equal protection

            	RULE:  when there’s a fundamental right at stake, the court applies strict scrutiny

            			even if EP requires only RBR

            	procreation is a fundamental right

            	just RBR says: upheld

            	under FRSS:  invalidated

            	this raises “the specter of Lochner”

            		the court protected a fundamental right of contract back then

            	the court is sensitive about the past, doesn’t want to resurrect Lochner

            	EP analysis only:  you’re telling the state that the gov can reg in that area, but classify on a different basis

            		in EP, you can nix the use of race, but they can still have admissions policies

            	in DPFR analysis, the court says we’re going to give everything in this domain SS

            		EP:  nix the classification, free to reg in the zone

            		FR:  the whole zone is out of bounds (SS)

            	SKINNER JOINS EP AND FR


            SAN ANTONIO v RODRIGUEZ

            	we did the EP analysis ourselves

            	wealth classifications are not suspect

            		its a changing class, thats relevant to governance, that’s mutable in individuals

            	RBR, then and it passes

            	how about FR?

            	is education a fundamental right?

            		NO

            	fundamental rights are born out of the consequences of what happens if you don’t have one
            		(consequences/outcomes)

            	they try to link an implied fundamental right of education to a listed fundamental right like free speech

            	but they find none

            	so, they find that RBR is appropriate

            		and it passes as always

            	some dissenters apply RBR in a tough way

            	some dissenters suggest a spectrum of review

            		depending on the interest you find and the classification


            PYLER v DOE

            	we see the court work through EP and FR analysis in the same case again

            	does not overturn san antonio

            	but it applies IR instead of RBR

            	it looks at the class: undocumented children

            		it’s partially suspect
            		they did not chose their status
            		it’s relevant in that its a crime
            		but the children did not choose to be illegals

            	edu is not a fundamental right, but it’s a total denial here

            	explicitly listed rights and closely connected implied rights are fundamental

            	THE CONSEQUENCES ARE TERRIBLE of having an illiterate underclass

            	this does not mean there’s a fundamental right to EDU

            		but the court does shift gears a bit

            		the class is neither suspect nor non suspect

            	it’s not fundamental, but it’s not generic RBR

            	the court applies IR in a FR context!



            TODAY:  ABORTION

            abortion is included in the fundamental right to privacy

            but it has a special jurisprudence around it

            	(they also have a set of special tests for free speech, too)

            we’ll see a special version of SS in each area and we need to know them both




            GRISWOLD v CONNECTICUT

            gives us the right to privacy

            we got a yale doc, planned parenthood, and a Connecticut law that prohibited use of contraception

            we’re identifying a new unlisted fundamental right

            we presently have two strategies for IDing fundamental rights:

            	-grave consequences without it
            	-textually related to listed right

            here, they do a little bit of consequence analysis

            and, they do a bit of relation analysis

            	what’s the listed right, what’s the nexus?

            	the right to publish is a satellite right of the right to free speech, e.g.

            the court gets to a right to privacy using this strategy

            	they infer from the “zones of privacy” connected to different clauses in the bill of rights

            	the court: general right to privacy is connected to the right to marital privacy

            	the court:  this is not RBR, but we don’t yet know what it is


            this analysis bears a resemblance to Rodriguez in that it infers a right from the text of the constitution

            	penumbras, emanations, zones

            		the right to privacy comes from these zones of privacy

            goldberg looks at the ninth amendment, which gives us a rule of interpretation

            	there are fundamental rights that aren’t listed

            	the 9th authorizes the strategy of implying rights, either from text or from consequences

            	he says we got to look at the past and see if traditional culture has treated a right as fundamental

            		he uses this to limit the court’s search for fundamental rights

            		only that which is deeply rooted in traditional culture is eligible here


            where the justices find right to privacy:

            	1) textual basis (Douglas Maj)
            	2) 9th deeply rooted in tradition (Goldberg)
            	3) DP liberty informed reflection (Harlan)


            HARLAN:

            there’s some substantive rights in Due Process.

            	states must not only follow the rules
            	they must also follow rules that respect life liberty and property

            Harlan is open to substantive rights in the 14th DP clause

            what substantive content should we pour into the word liberty?

            	he doesn’t look to the text

            	he does look a bit to traditions (both current and abandoned)
            		what rights that are fundamental in all free governments?
            		he’s addressing the bad tradition problem

            	it’s not text, it’s not tradition, it’s not…

            	he sees a rational continuum

            	it’s more theoretical.

            	he finds a right to privacy

            	therefore he wants a higher level of review

            White would only use RBR, but he would still invalidate the law (concur)

            	san antonio, cleburne.  he uses RBR to overturn without bare desire to harm



            Black sees no fundamental right to privacy (dissent)

            	he sees the court as acting like a super legislature, and not a court

            	he would apply RBR and uphold it

            Stewart would do the same

            	doesn’t love the law, but doesn’t see it as his job to overturn it

            	go back to the legislature if you don’t like it


            RBR is default.  B&S pass it under RBR because no fundamental right == RBR == law can stand.


            Strategies for finding a fundamental right:

            	1 consequences
            	2 text of const
            	3 tradition
            	4 informed reflection



            ROE v WADE

            decision whether to have an abortion located under right to privacy

            less attention to finding the fundamental right, more given to meaning of SS

            TX statute prohibits abortions

            the court authorizes any strategy for finding a right to privacy

            	they prefer 14th, but its cool

            the real question is:

            	should we treat the decision to have an abortion as fundamental, like the right to use contraception?

            	does abortion fall under the veil of right to privacy?

            why does the court land it there?

            	tradition would not land it there using a Goldberg strategy

            	not from text

            	not from moral rights

            	consequences would be horrendous

            		they look at the consequences of outlawing abortion

            		they look at ruined lives and botched abortions

            the consequences argument sweeps abortion into FR

            since we have a FR, it’s heightened review: SS

            	we would need a compelling government interest

            	we would need a narrowly tailored law


            so:  compelling interest? 3 interests.

            	-discourage illicit sex.  TX doesn’t use that.
            	-protecting pregnant women
            	-protecting fetuses

            		only at the second trimester is where the woman’s health issues kicks in

            			only at the start of the the second trimester can the state regulate in the name of mother health

            			if they do pass regs, they have a shot at passing SS if they only hit the second two trimesters

            				they’d still have to be narrowly tailored


            		why does the court not claim that texas is protecting life as fetus?

            			historically, person only means post-natal

            			sometimes people claim life starts at conception, some claim it starts at 28 weeks

            			modern terms judge viability at 28 weeks or so

            			quickening and kicking is judged only by the woman

            			they skip all this nonsense

            		they look instead at an interest in potential life

            			the state’s interest in the life of the fetus becomes compelling at start of third trimester

            			still has to be narrowly tailored


            	court IDs a FR

            	they apply SS

            	the court develops a sophisticated system, compelling interests kick in at different times



            Rehnquist says no FR, therefore RBR

            	but you could argue against him:  no FR, no RBR, but this is a gender classification, how about IR?

            		they don’t do that.  they stick with FR.  they do no skinner, san antonio, doe, analysis.



            this case creates a culture of political mobilization that causes people to rally against abortion

            	the trend of decriminalizing abortion got drawn into politics

            	abortion attitudes become a litmus test for who gets appointed




            Maher v ROE

            differential funding of procedures

            court upholds a reg that prefers childbirth to non therapeutic abortions

            so, EP analysis:

            	1) inability to pay for abortion is classification.  non suspect (san antonio)

            	RBR is no hurdle.  flies.

            FR analysis:

            	privacy is a fundamental right

            	why doesn’t the court apply SS here?

            		the gov, after all, has made impossible the existence of a fundamental right

            		but that impossibility was not government-created

            			the impossibility was made by poverty, not the gov


            	the court protects against gov abridgment of a right, but can’t step in when the cause is the world, not gov

            		SS applies to gov actions that abridge a right

            		they see no gov abridgment

            		only when the gov impairs the right will SS come out

            	here, gov acts and it so happens to have this effect

            		so, we drag out mcklesky to show disparate impact


            the court sees no abridgment of a fundamental right.  gov does not block, poverty does.


            this is another example of the formality of rights

            	you have a right to decide whether to have an abortion

            	whether you get to exercise that right is not the courts biz



            HARRIS v McRAE

            	this case deals with whit holding funds for medically necessary abortions

            	we’re not dealing with a woman’s right to privacy

            	we’re talking about health at stake

            		does this change the analysis?


            	just because the state has a compelling interest in the health of the woman, no obligation

            		the court doesn’t have to act to regulate health

            		the state CAN reg if it wants to

            	you get no guarantee of a meaningful exercise of your rights


            Stevens says health of the woman is more compelling than the potential life of the fetus

    CON LAW DAY 17

        Yesterday:

            we ID'd where fundamental right to privacy comes from

            fundamental right to procreate is implied by the court because a lack of such right is disatrous

            the court looks for a nexus between an enumerated right and an implied right

            the court found no right to EDU using this format

            edu is not close enough to an enumerated right


            how to find a right:

            first

            	-textually
            	-implied from text
            	-reasoning from the penumbra surrounding the text

            second

            	-abandon the text
            	-look to tradition
            	-deeply rooted rights are fundamental
            	-if its consistently been held as a right, then its a right even if not in const

            third

            	-harlan
            	-look at the meaning of due process
            	-rights due to all citizens of free governments


            each one of these strategies found a right to privacy

            privacy was not general, but linked to marriage



            SO WHAT LEVEL OF SCRUTINY?

            the shadow of lochner:  is there really any way to find a fundmental right thats not in the const

            	the court wants to avoid being political



            roe v wade

            	right to privacy becomes complicated

            	is the right to privacy borad enough to include a right to abort

            	court finds the privacy will be respected

            	but

            	there's two legit compelling state interests

            		health of the woman
            		life of the fetus

            	these two interest become compelling at the end of the first and second trimester respecitvely

            	at that point, the court will permit narrowly tailored legislation to reg abortion (for health)

            	did the court really take a position on when life begins?

            	the court still suggests exceptions to save the life of a pregnant woman

            		in this sense, even in the third trimester, the woman's health is a more copelling interest than the fetus's

            	the court claims to allow competing viewsm balancing interests and rights

            	in setting up this scheme the court comes up against griswold objections

            		isnt this like lochner? rehnquist says

            		he applies RBR and would let the reg stand


            maher v roe
            harris v mcrae


            	differential funding of therapetic and nontherapeutic abortions

            	no big deal, says the court

            	classifies on wealth, RBR, passes

            	FR?

            		does the presence of a FR allow for heightened review?

            		no

            		because the state is not actually abridging the right to privacy

            		theyre only choosing how to spend funds

            		its not placing an obstacle in the way of aborters

            		sure, some women wont be able to have abortions because of this

            			but this is not an abridgement of privacy, because it results from their poverty and not gov






            TODAY:

            PLANNED PARENTHOOD V CASEY

            	states have been regulating provision of abortion

            		court struck them down

            		the membership of the court changes

            		the court's attitudes toward identical regulations is now different

            		these cases test the court's commitment to roe


            	starts with "Liberty finds no refuge in a jurisprudence of doubt."

            	stare decisis: roe should be upheld

            	the right here is unique

            		it's not the right to have an abortion

            		it's the right to SELF-DEFINITION

            			griswold is not about a right to condoms, it's about a right to marital privacy


            	they affirm that the right to privacy includes the right to have an abortion

            	it's a right for women to self-define according to her own sense of belief and identity

            		this a broad definition of the right

            		right to an abortion would be a narrow defintion (not correct, though)

            the court stands by their duty to protect the right

            they justify their use of heightened review

            	-MANAGABLE: the court asserts that this is all justiciable and administrable

            	-RELIED ON: a generation of women have grown up knowing its available and they rely on it

            		these women know the court is protecting womens right to self definition

            	-STILL RELEVANT: no new legal theory here, roe is not like plessy (invalidated by BROWN) or lochner (invalidated by west coast hotel)

            		the world has not changed like with plessy, and theory has not changed either

            	if the court invalidated roe:

            		things would be terrible!

            		it would negatively impact women who had relied on it

            		it would negatively impact the court if they backpedaled

            			their legitimacy depends on maintaining roe

            			if they back off they look like dorks, like they caved to political pressure

            				they want to feel like a netural arbiter, not like they feel political pressure


            The court upholds Roe, but fundamentally changes it

            	viability was a key measure in Roe

            	viability is still the point where the state can reg about the fetus

            	the trimester scheme is out

            		they say it wasnt a main point in roe

            		though it was...

            		they also think there was something wrong about it

            			it misconceives the interests at stake

            				-WOMENS' HEALTH IS NOT CONFINED TO TRIMESTERS, IT'S A CONTINUOUS CONCERN

            				-trimester scheme undervalues states interest in the fetus too

            				-STATE INTEREST IN FETUS BECOMES COMPELLING AT THE MOMENT OF CONCEPTION

            	THERE IS NO MORE TRIMESTER SCHEME

            	the state interest are compelling throughout the pregnancy

            	but the right to privacy persists

            		it lives along side a wider field for state regulation

            		the entire pregnancy is opened to narrowly tailored regulation

            	Roe's SS standard dies, and with compelling state interests throughout the preg

            	now, the court must look at each regulation throughout the pregnancy

            	the point of viability still matters.  states can prohibit termination of viable fetuses



            STATES NOW CANNOT PLACE AN UNDUE BURDEN

            	STATES CAN REG SO LONG AS IT DOES NOT HAVE THE PURPOSE OR EFFECT TO POSE A SUBSTANTIAL OBSTACLE

            	we're interested in application of the undue burden standard

            	PROVISION OF INFORMATION is not an undue burden

            		woman comes in and wants an abortion, but she has to read a pamphet first

            		not an undue burden

            		provision of information serves the health of the mother, which is a CGP throughout

            		informing them allows women to avoid unforseen psychological consequences

            		just fine so long as its not misleading

            	24 HOUR WAITING PERIOD

            		this is a bigger burden

            		two trips means a higher cost

            		the waiting period serves the interest: health of the mother

            			how does this help?

            				it allows a woman to deliberate and make a better decision

            		this is closer to a substantial obstacle, but it's not there

            		it still informs women, and serves the psychological health of the mother

            		just fine

            	REPORTING REQUIREMENTS

            		also upheld bc they serve the health of the mother

            	NOTIFICATIONS TO HUSBANDS

            		this IS an undue burden because evidence shows women get beat

            		reporting to parents is fine because parents are dominant over kids

            		reporting to husbands is not OK because it subjugates women

            			this is inconsistent with the broader definition of the right

            			it denies their right to self definition


            		this is sort of strange because it's inconsistent with the differential funding

            			the gov didnt make the abusive relationship

            			the logic of these other cases would allow the states to reg this way

            			the court is a little unstable in this respect

            			your self determination is or is not limited by the circumstances



            	differential funding cases: gov placed no obstacle in the path of women, RBR upheld

            	here: state defnitely places an obstacle, but upheld because not substantial

            		two different methods of upholding a law

            		one says right now impacted at all

            		other says right is impacted, sure, but not a substantial obstacle


            	they serve the state interest in the health of the mother and they do not place an undue burden

            	NO MORE SS of abortion laws


            STEVENS DISSENT:

            	provision of information is not really about protecting health

            	because everyone gets it

            	the court is actually giving a free pass to the state

            	the court doesnt ask the hard questions

            		is this really about the health of the mother?

            	this isnt a failure, though, because the court has no obligation to do this outside of HR


            UNDUE BURDEN ANALYSIS LOWERS THE STD OF REVIEW, even as maj gives a broader definition of the right


            ROE KINDA STANDS:


            FUNDAMENTAL RIGHT TO PRIVACY STILL ALLOWS FOR ABORTIONS

            SAME INTERESTS STILL EMPOWER GOV, health of woman, potential life of fetus

            VIABILITY IS STILL SPECIAL, gov can prohibit all abortions at this point



            THING HAVE CHANGED THOUGH:


            whole preg can now be regd

            no more SS, now undue burden

            the state need only show its not doing something with the purpose or effect of placing a substantial obstacle in the way of a woman having an abortion



            CRITICISMS:

            conservatives:

            stare decisis argument isnt even stuck to

            standing on the roe point makes court seem political, not apolitical

            scalia compares it to dred scott

            undue burden doesnt make sense because there's no FR here

            liberals:

            this is a lower standard than SS

            you've given more leeway to the states

            third approach:

            blackmun says EP and FR analysis should play

            even though this is not a FR issue, THEY ARE EP VIOLATIONS

            these laws only affect women

            blackmun says these arent gender neutral reg classifications (who's seeking an abortion)

            	the classification is between the women and men

            	there should be IR

            	if you still had ROE, you wouldnt need IR because roe gave you one better: SS

            	but

            	since we dont have roe, why not bring out the old EP analysis?

            		IR might overturn more laws than undue burden


            these waiting requirements are related to an archaic overbroad attitude about women

            	if thats the case, then you could craig and VMI those bastards

            the court doesn't go in that direction though



            GONZALES v CARHART

            	state partial-birth abortion law struck down because too vague

            	the political definition of the procedure was too broad

            	the effect, but not purpose, was to place a substantial burden

            	the federal law at issue here is not too broad

            		its limited to a specific feature
            		it uses anatomical landmarks
            		there's an intent requirement

            		the court is satisfied it doesnt suffer from same indefiniteness

            the government's interest here is in the potential life of the fetus

            	it does it by restricting certain methods

            	there's still plenty of methods left

            	ginsburg:  this method devalues life in an egregious way

            	disaproving of this allows gov to express its valuation of the life of the fetus

            	gov sends a signal about this method

            the gov also advances its interest in the health of the mother

            	some say this procedure is better for physical reasons (DISPUTED)

            	the state advances psychological health reasons

            		a method is being prohibited in order to prevent women from the psychological burden

            	kennedy and the maj join the gov in showing women how dreadful the procedure is



            to what end are women being informed?

            	to inform decision making

            	but the info can't be misleading

            	here, they're not really offering neutral info

            	it's more like part of a propaganda campaign

            	casey: big decision, need info here it is, wait it out, and come back

            	here:  state should be able to push their info and perspective on the issue

            	as long as they don't distort, they can give just one side


            presenting info from a single point of view is fine

            	it's not a substantial burden



CON LAW DAY 18

    PLANNED PARENTHOOD V CASEY

    	state has an interest from the moment of conception

    	roe trimester schedule is gone

    	the test of these regulations in not SS

    		no compelling means test
    		no narrowly tailored

    	THE TEST IS NOW THE UNDUE BURDEN STANDARD

    		no purpose or effect of placing a SUBSTANTIAL OBSTACLE in the way of an abortion

    		the undue burden std works from conception to viability

    	the WOMAN STILL RETAINS A FUNDAMENTAL RIGHT TO PRIVACY

    		the casey court defines the right as a RIGHT OF SELF DEFINITION

    	VIABILITY is still an important point in the pregnancy

    		even though trimester scheme gone

    		state can prohibit abortion entirely at viability

    		without the undue burden std

    		there have to be exceptions to save the life of the mother

    	the court distinguishes casey from lochner and plessy

    		there, facts and understandings had changed

    		here, facts were the same

    		women had come to rely on the existence of roe

    		the court would lose legitimacy by invalidating roe

    	the state can place obstacles (24h waiting period) but they cannot be substantial

    	the state cannot give husbands veto power over their wives abortions


    GONZALEZ V CARHART

    	congress declared partial-birth abortion to be never medically necessary

    		despite science to the contrary

    	this was a narrowly defined ban

    	they apply the undue burden std

    		you can raise the cost of an abortion in the service of one of the two interests

    		and as long as its not a substantial block

    	here, the ban serves both interest in health of mother and interest in potential life of the fetus

    		there's a loose connection to informing women and helping them protect mental health

    		and it reflects respect for potential life of the fetus

    	there's not a tight connection between means and ends

    		nonetheless its constitutional

    	it's a lower std than SS because interests need not be compelling

    	and also the nexus between means and ends need not be very tight

    		(how is denial of a procedure type beneficial to her health?  it's indirect)

    	court claims this is an advancement of casey

    	they assert that the court is going to be friendly toward abortion ban regulations



    AND THATS THE END OF ABORTION


    fundamental rights:  privacy, family, marriage

    how do we know a given right is fundamental?



    TODAY:

    MOORE v CITY OF EAST CLEVELAND

    	city bans certain arrangements of family member living together

    	in the past, we've seen people infer the existence of a fundamental right where it's closely linked to an enumerated fundamental right


    		(griswold)

    		TEXTUAL NEXUS

    		it's not linked to freedom of association

    			thats for political purposes, not for family

    		still, we can form SATELLITE RIGHTS around the listed ones

    		they form PENUMBRAS

    		and in those penumbras you can see a FR


    		(skinner)

    		CONSEQUENCES

    		think of what would happen if we sterilzed criminals!

    		think of what would happen if a woman didnt have the right to an abortion!


    		TRADITION

    		goldberg, etc

    			rights of all people in free governments

    		deeply rooted traditions


    	What aspects of the family are protected?

    		family, sex, PROCREATION:  skinner, griswold

    		self-definition: casey


    	WHITE uses a consequentialist argument

    		the consequences are trivial

    		you're blocked from this one suburb here, with the people who say are your family

    		there's no profound loss or lfielong disability


    	We have some kind of fundamental right

    		they should apply SS

    		they don't

    		they use something more like an intermediate level

    			there's a desire to resolve traffic issues and overcrowding

    				this would work for RBR but not for SS

    				semi legit ends

    			the means serve the ends marginally at best

    				so the law fails this mixed test

    		if they broke out SS for every case involving a fundamental right to family, shit hits fan

    			there'd be too much litigation

    			"this lectrue brought to you by indeterminate stds of review"

    	MOORE:  there's some fundamental right to family

    		they find it in traditional roots

    		the dissent looks to consequence and says no FR

    		someone objects on the basis of weak nexus between means and ends

    		the court applies HR that sounds like IR but is definitely not SS or RBR



    ZABLOCKI v REDHAIL

    Wisconsin statute requires fathers to pay their child support before they get married

    	EP analysis:  treats groups of grooms differently based on their capacity to pay child support

    		[the court claims to approach this through EP]

    	the amount of money you have is non-suspect

    		amount of money you have is mutable and relevant

    	so this only has to pass RBR, ostensibly

    	they don't do this

    	they find a FR to marriage

    		we know its FR bc there's precedent for it and traditional roots

    		marriage is not two steps away from the listed rights

    			it's right there with the other FR only one step away from the listed ones

    			it's not attached as in hanging on them, but it's part of their family

    	but they don't apply SS

    	they use some intermediate std

    		(sufficiently important state interest and closely tailored)

    			closely tailored < (narrowly tailored == necessary)

    	the fit is not sufficiently close

    		it doesn't get any money to the kids

    		it just prevents that dads from marrying (vertical fit)

    		there are better ways to serve this end (horizontal fit)

    	there are other regs that impinge on the right to marry

    		no incest, no marrying if you have VD

    		these would fly

    		this would not


    	this is like skinner (econ classification, RBR unless FR)

    		they do find a FR, but they apply a middle level of review

    		it leaves intact a lot of other regs of marriage



    	in the abortion funding cases (maher v roe and its neighbor)

    		gov blocked funding for certain types of abortions

    		court did not even apply a heightened level of review

    		its a FR case in roe era, so whould be SS

    		but they don't because it's economic status not gov action

    		the state is not touching a FR at all

    	here, the court says a FR does trigger HR

    		why not just tell the grooms to get a job?

    		it was good enough in abortion cases, but not here

    		in the abortion context, gov places some restriction related to money, no aplgy

    		in this context, the opposite

    		it's plainly inconsistent, which is the court's prerogative

    CONCURRENCES:

    	powell and stewart both opt for the due process clause

    	they say it would have helped the court constrain its decision

    		EP affects the way the gov chooses to regulate

    			they can still reg in the neighborhood, but well

    		DP forecloses an entire zone

    			anyhting in the neighborhood will trigger SS

    		USING EP ANALYSIS LETS THE COURT RESTRAIN ITS DECISION



    BOWERS v HARDWICK

    	Georgia's anti-sodomy statute criminalizes all sodomy

    	the court defines the right at stake here as:

    		the right to same-sex sodomy

    	they go out looking for it

    		they try to find it deeply rooted in tradition (moore, east cleveland)

    		it's not there, even before american law

    	therefore RBR

    	therefore upheld

    	[the narrower you define the right, the less likely you are to find it in tradition]

    		 a broader definition of a right allows you to find it in the past

    	the court here does no EP analysis

    	THIS CASE OVERTURNED BY LAWRENCE v TEXAS


    LAWRENCE v TEXAS

    	TX statute criminalizes same-sex sodomy

    	the court tries to find a fundamental right to PRIVACY

    		they define the right as the right of everyone to privacy in the home
    		and as a right to self-definition (kennedy's casey language)

    		why define this as a right to privacy instead of a right to sodomy?

    			BROADLY DEFINING WHAT RIGHT IS AT STAKE ALLOWS YOU TO STRIKE DOWN THE LAW

    		step one: frame the right as a right to self-definition instead of sodomy

    			it's demeaning to the gays to frame the right so narrowly

    			BOWERS FRAMED THE RIGHT INCORRECTLY

    		step two: abandon the [incorrect] traditional/historical analysis

    			the court points to an evolving set of attitudes and beliefs

    				there's a broad trend across the world and scholarship

    				people treat homosexuality better these days

    			BOWERS ONLY LOOKED AT THE PAST, NOT AT THE TRAJECTORY WE'RE ON

    		The court uses a DP analysis

    		they find a FR and do EP a bit too

    		but they want to prevent the existence of even a well-crafted antisodomy law

    			they want to scrub out the stigma

    			they do it by making a FR to self definition

    			and they seal it up with a DP FR analysis


    		OCONNOR would strike this down under RBR on bare desire to harm

    			but this would leave space for criminalization of all sodomy

    				or well crafted laws that criminalize gay sodomy

    	We found fundamental rights all over this lecture (except bower)

    	SS is not applied here

    		no one knows what's really applied here

    	theres no rational interest, but we don't know why its failed

    		SCALIA freaks the fuck out


    	here, and in the future, we have FR without SS


CON LAW 19

    Last time:

    	we've been moving along a continuum

    		-listed rights
    		-IMPLIED FUNDAMENTAL RIGHTS

    			(P&I was rejected as a source)

    			back in the day substantive due process was identified as a source of FR

    			a heightened test of reaosnableness was used throughout the LOCHNER era

    				they mainly protected economic rights

    			The court constrained the state's regulatory authority

    			BLAISDELL ended the LOCHNER era

    				they expanded the regulatory power of the state

    				to do so, they eliminated the freedom to contract as a fundamental right

    			skinner gave the start of the intersection of DPFR and EP analyses

    		HOW DOES COURT ID A FR?

    		HOW DOES COURT USE DP AND EP TO ANALYSZE A CASE?


    		there is a right to family that is

    			DEEPLY ROOTED IN OUR TRADITION and HISTORY

    			(goldberg's concurrence in griswold)

    			FR to family also can be found because of CONSEQUENCES

    			also can be found in the PENUMBRA / periphery of enumerated rights

    		why no SS for every FR?

    			maybe they were worried about calling other laws into Q


    	ZABLOCKI

    		FR to marry

    		no SS, HR instead

    		struck down on fit grounds

    		they to the analysis under EP here

    			why not DPFR?
    			why not SS?

    		they're worried about too sweeping a ruling

    			"we are not a superlegislature, we are not a lochner court"

    		ability to pay was a condition for exercising the right to marry

    			san antonio v rodriguez: ability to pay did not matter bc no FR to EDU

    			in the abortion funding cases, the FR to privacy gave us a FR

    				but still not a big deal because the limitations did not touch right to privacy

    					gov's policy has nothing to do with right to privacy, says court

    					it's your own doing, not the gov's


    	BOWERS

    		They identify a narrowly defined right (right to gay sex)

    			law was about all sodomy, but the case was about gay sodomy

    		they try to use the "deeply rooted" method

    		but that's a way to blow off the case



    	LAWRENCE

    		The court shifts the definition of the right we're looking for

    			they dont ask the bower q

    			they ask, is there a liberty of self definition that includes defining yourself through you itnimate relatinoships

    		the court looks to history again

    			GOLDBERG: DEEPLY ROOTED

    			HARLAN: TRADITION AS A TRAJECTORY

    			nonprocreative sex has been prohibited

    			but attitudes have been changing

    			we're headed towards more liberty of self definition as far as intimate behavior

    			they don't say whether the right is fundamental

    				we might say it's fundamental based on the casey definition of self definition

    		THE COURT DOES NOT SAY: this is a FR

    		Oconnor looks at it as an EP RBR failure


    		Sexual orientation laws:

    			oconnor says RBR

    			MAJ gives no answer


    		we don't get a statement that this liberty is fundamental
    		we don't get the level of review IDd
    		we don't see any ruling about the kind of classification sexual orientation is
    		we dont see analogies to other rights


    		we are told that the proper framing of the right is the liberty of self definition

    			find this for same sex couples in TRAJECTORY, not strictly in the past


    		The court is trying to give a very limited ruling

    			they only care about criminalization of gay sodomy

    			they don't want to call all sexual orientation laws into question


    			dissent:  MAJ not being humble, they just want freedom



    TODAY:


    we're finishing the story of implied FR and EP


    WASHINGTON v GLUCKSBERG

    	statute criminalizes assistance of suicide

    	the issue: is there a FR at stake?

    		if yes, WA must defend their law
    		if no, conversation over

    	IS THERE A FR TO ASSISTED SUICIDE?

    		(this is a concrete specific framing of the right)

    		they do it this way because of a fear of lochner

    	They see a long history of the opposite of a right to assisted suicide

    		THERE IS NO RIGHT TO ASSISTED SUICIDE IN OUR HISTORY

    	no FR, so RBR:

    		the state IDs a lot of state interests at stake

    			theyre all legit or compelling

    		the means are rationally related


    	BUT there's other methods of IDing FR

    		souter uses the trends arguments

    		personal autonomy is at stake (casey)


    	BREYER:  there's this issue of extreme suffering

    		we could make a consequentialist argument about pain

    		if WA had outlawed palliative care, then this would play different

    		this bit suggests there might be something fundamental here


    	GLUCKSBERG stands for:  look to history for FR, define the right at the most specific level (1997)

    		CASEY:  right at stake is self definition / autonomy (1992)

    		glucksberg backs off the casey "general right to personal autonomy"

    		the precedential value of a broad framing does not carry

    		ADDS SOME STUFF, but nothing terribly new

    			we already knew how to look to deeply rooted traditions

    			its new in that it insists in narrow definitions of rights (right to assisted suicide)

    			in this respect, it jives with bowers

    			it also tells us each FR claim must have its own justification

    				this is because of a fear of lochner

    				this methodolgy limits the court's power and discretion

    				this restrains the court from inventing new rights

    					this method happens to reject most claims of rights

    					it wants concrete practices from the past for its justifications



    UNITED STATES v WINDSOR

    	2013

    	it's about DOMA (federal defense of marriage act)

    	the court asserts that right to regulate marriage rests with the state

    	the feds came down on a gay couple tax-wise

    	there's a federalism concern that the congress is edging in on state turf

    		it does not get invalidated on federalism grounds, though


    	KENNEDY strikes this law down on BARE DESIRE TO HARM

    		think Moreno, Romer

    		thats an EP analysis

    		they claim theres NO GOV purpose beyond the purpose of burdening the group

    		the disparate burden does not make it unconstitutional on its own (BARE DESIRE)

    			but a lack of other purposes added on does

    			its not about the burden, its about the lack of legit justifications

    			hatred of hippies is not alone enough

    				you don't need muchm it's RBR, but there's gotta be something

    		Romer analogy:

    			we have here sweeping, durable disabilities imposed by DOMA

    			feds are going way beyond the usual scope

    			its unusual in its sweep

    			there's no precedent for taking a subset of marriages and giving them a disability

    		Starts out looking like a federalism issue, but that's a fak out

    		instead, it's about this unusual sweeping law that targets a set of marriages without justification


    		THERE'S NO FR IDd HERE

    		THERE'S NO INDICATION OF SUSPECT/QS/NS CLASSIFICATION

    	this case isnt really an EP analysis

    		we jump straight from the facts of the case into bare desire to harm

    		we do none of the steps

    		we don't know what classification we're dealing with

    	the court says its not about same sex marriage, but instead about bare desire to harm

    	SCALIA:  don't beleive it!  I told you not to beleive it!

    		it's really all about same sex marriage!

    		he wants the leg to do its job, and the court to do its job



    	THIS CASE FLOATS AROUND OUR DOCTRINAL TOOLS

    		but it does not move through our flow chart

    		some stuff is missing

    			no analysis of what classification

    			we go straight to fails RBR

    		marriage is a FR, but they don't do a FR analysis

    		BY NOT SAYING THESE THINGS, THE COURT CONSTRAINS ITS DECISION

    			(fear of lochner)

    		the dissenters say this fuzziness is about being political


    OBERGEFELL v HODGES

    	Prohibition on same sex marriage

    	1- is there a right to same sex marriage?
    	2- are states required to recognize same sex marriages from other states

    		if 1 is yes, 2 is yes also
    		q2 is kind of an insurance policy
    		q2 would not be a rights analysis, itd be about relationships between states
    		q2 does come up because:

    	THERE IS A RIGHT TO SAME SEX MARRIAGE

    	THERE IS A RIGHT TO SELF-DEFINITION and AUTONOMY

    		this is a bit like casey, lawrence

    		this is not like glucksberg

    			it frames a broad liberty

    	is this right fundamental?

    		casey would say yes

    		others would say no

    		the court sets aside glucksberg

    			which turns down the rule that each reqs its own justification

    	they also don't commit to history the way glucksberg did

    	PROTO-CONSEQUENTIALIST ARG:

    		without this right, families and children are negatively impacted

    		without this right, individuals suffer in terms of their family lives

    		these consequences together suggest a FR

    			but the court does not carry out this argument

    	ANALOGY between same-sex couples who are married and opposite sex couples who are married

    		MARRIAGE IS a FR for opposite sex couples

    		lots of cases recognize this

    		all the same reasons for making marriage a FR count for gays too

    		-it creates a stable environment for children
    		-its about self definition
    		-enduring compainship
    		-keystone of social order

    		same sex couples are the same as opposite sex couples in these respects

    	PROTO-TRADITION ARGUMENT

    		there's a trajectory toward giving rights to gay couples


    	If there's a FR here, we would expect SS (or maybe HR)

    		there's no SS analysis here

    			the court spends almost no time investigating the reasons behind these bands

    			doctrinally, we would expect to see this

    			they don't do a fit analysis

    			they dont talk about what kind of classification

    			they don't tell us what level of review

    			it leaves a lot of Qs open like lawrence


    	The dissent accuses the MAJ of characterizing those opposed to same sex marriage as animated by hatred

    		they say they're not bigots who oppose same sex marriage


    	The court is not measuring the state justification against some doctrinal test

    	They say that individuals can hold views opposite without being bad, but turning it into public policy demeans the people in same sex marriages

    	why leave so many questions open?

    		it restrains the decision somehwat



    	DISSENTS:

    		Slippery slope to polygamy

    		Slippery slope to tyrrany

    		Scalia attacks the unrepresentative qualoities of the court

    		the court corrupts our doctrinal framework



    	The court is still not up to establishing a fundamental right to autonomy

    	OBERGEFELL demonstrates to us the flexibility of the doctrine


CON LAW DAYS 20 & 21


    We wrapped up implied fundamental rights

    IDing them is the tough part, ostensibly

    Lochner fears make this extra tricky

    when they find one, they're supposed to use SS, but they don't


    WASH v GLUCKBERG

    	added to our IDing toolkit

    	part of their method was familiar

    		"deeply rooted in tradition"

    		bowers, etc

    	new in gluck:

    		-the right must be narrowly framed and specifically described
    			(not "right to autonomy" rather "right to assisted suicide")
    			this is supposed to restrain judicial decisions
    			it prevents lochnerish overreach

    		-each claim of a fundamental right must be justified on its own
    			eg in casey the right to self definition does not extent to suicide

    		-narrows greatly the number of rights we're likely to find out there


    US v WINDSOR and OBERGEFELL v HODGES

    	case decides without deciding
    	they answer an issue but leave a lot open

    WINDSOR

    	this is an EP analysis

    	law is so sweeping and severe that court can ID a bare desire to harm

    	this is a federal analogue to romer

    	the court did not

    		tell us whether suspect, qs, or ns

    		tell us whether there's a FR
    			it doesnt do any of these:
    			consequences
    			text
    			tradition
    			evolution
    			analogies to prior cases

    OBERGEFELL

    	right to marry comes from precedent

    	do same sex couples have a FR to marry?

    	court proceeded BY ANALOGY

    	the court finds same sex couples similar to opposite sex couples

    	the court defines the right as "right to self definition"

    		contrary to glucksberg's precedent

    		ct:  new right, new rules

    	ct looks to TREND/EVOLUTION
    		we're being nicer to these people

    	ct looks to CONSEQUENCES
    		the children!

    	some of this is familiar, but not locked onto our framework

    	ct does not:

    		ID a level of review
    		application of a level of review
    			(they dont ask what purpose or check fit of means)
    		tell whether suspect, qs, or ns

    	dissent: this is politicians in robes, theyre not acting like a court

    		theyre just voting their values

    		no longer constitutional interp

    	court tries to limit the range of its ruling

    		it leaves things open, to protect itself from unanticipated consequences of a broad ruling

    	maybe this is a new kind of approach, a new doctrine different from our stds

    		Kennedy is leading the way to a new set of tests, perhaps

    		Kennedy is concerned about dignity of individuals and states




    TODAY:

    new unit

    explicitly listed rights

    think back to carolene products footnote 4

    	ct threatens to use a higher std of review for listed rights


    FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION

    	"Congress shall make no law abridging the freedom of speech, of of the press..."

    	governments have long been concerned with free speech as a destabilizing factor

    		the history of free speech is from the gov's perspective
    		it's a history of abridging free speech

    	Free speech theories:

    		-necessary to find truth
    		-allows us to operate our governments (elections)
    		-necessary to development of the self
    		-keeps governmental power in check
    		-teaches tolerance of differnt points of view
    		-allows development of moral character

    		none of these is in the constitution, but theyre supported in different places

    		some of these theories suggest different scopes for free speech

    			election speech is narrow, self development speech is broad


    SHAFFER

    	1919 birth of modern free speech jurisprudence

    	it's an example of a bad tendency test


    SCHENK v US

    	espionage act

    	some rascals sent out flyers insisting that people resist the draft

    	there's talk of effect of this speech, but no proof or evidence

    	this is called the BAD TENDENCY TEST

    		it looks at effect

    		purpose and effect are bound together

    			no evidence of intent beyond natural and probable consequences

    		this approach doesn't look beyond the document in question

    		ABSTRACT REASONING ABOUT EFFECT AND PURPOSE, NARROWLY FOCUSED ON THE SPEECH ITSELF

    		no exploration of empirical proof

    		its all about the judge's instinct and reasoning about what was said

    			you can constructively infer intent from the publication

    		YOU put the pamphet in front of the judge and let him make a call

    		requires a determination of effect and purpose based on text

    		IF THE EFFECT IS THERE, INTENT IS PRESUMED

    	this case also puts forward a new idea

    	THE CLEAR AND PRESENT DANGER TEST

    		speech would protected unless there's a clear and present danger

    		that some evil would come about that congress seeks to prevent

    		CIRCUMSTANCE, CONTEXT, PROXIMITY, AND DEGREE ALL MATTER HERE

    			this is different from bad consequence test bc it looks to the world beyond the text

    			it asks judge to sift through the context and likely consequences

    		You can shout fire at home, but you cannot shout fire in a theatre

    			you can shout fire if it's a play about fire and its your line
    			you can shout fire if there's really a fire
    			you cannot shout fire if it's not true and you just hope to see a stampede

    		HOW MUCH PROTECTION YOUR SPEECH GETS DEPENDS ON CONTEXT

    		THIS TEST DOES NOT REQUIRE US TO WAIT FOR ACTUAL BAD CONSEQUENCES

    			the gov can criminalize prophylactically

    		it's different from the bad tendency test, but the court still uphold this conviction

    		the time and place of the speech are determinative

    			it's wartime!


    		instead of just looking at the speech, you now look at the time and context

    			both tests allow the gov to send you to prison for what you say

    			but they respond to two different sets of conditions

    			can lead to two different results, but it does not here



    FROHWERK v US

    	german language newspaper, fro was sentenced to prisonfor breeding disloyalty

    	holmes writes for the court

    		he infers probable intent from the likely consequences

    	this is another BAD TENDENCY TEST

    		they say that you don't even have to see any evidence of an effect

    		just the risk of danger is enough

    		they look at the text, and imagine a disruptive consequence

    			this vision allows them to infer intent

    			the sum effect is that this poor bastard is going to jail



    DEBS v US

    	leader of socialist party convicted under espionage act

    	holmes upholds

    	part of the purpose and effect of the speech was to oppose the war

    		most of the speech was about socialism

    		but the court picked out pieces that had a reaosnable tendency to obstruct

    		purpose is inferred from the judicial analysis of the speech

    	if the reasonable consequence of any element of your speech allows a judge to infer intent

    		youre fucked



    THIS IS CONSISTENT WITH THE DEEP HISTORY OF FREE SPEECH

    	there's major restrictions on freedom of speech

    	the judges can send off a punk to jail based on inferences

    THE CLEAR AND PRESENT DANGER TEST

    	allows the judge to look to the context of the speech

    	you check if there's a real possibility of bad consequences

    	not just a tendency within the text, given the right context, to cause bad consequences

    	starting with Abrams, the clear and present danger test moves up from dissents and into cases



    ABRAMS v US

    	russian immigrants convicted for anti-imperialism speech

    	court upholds under not BT

    		if it was BT:
    			the natural consequence is general strike
    			the intent to cause one is apparent
    			we don't have to sweat the actual likely consequences

    	HOLMES' dissent is famous here

    		he changes his mind about free speech over a summer bc of his friends
    		the law stays the same, HOLMES changes

    		he says there's not sufficient intent

    			he now requires specific intent

    			not just intent to cause some action

    				these russian intend to influence US policy toward russia
    				we're not at war with russia, we're at war with germany

    			he now wants to see precise proof of what they actually intended

    			this would be more speech protective

    				it makes it tougher to ID the requisitie element of intent

    				you still focus on the document

    				but you require judges to explain why their inference of intent is justified

    		this vision keeps the BT test but makes it more protective by raising the bar for reaonsableness

    		the point is to protect legitimate criticism of the government

    			we don't want to short circuit debates on policy

    			patriots make good faith arguments that sometimes can hurt the country

    		CLEAR AND PRESENT DANGER TEST

    			looks to consequences

    			does the speech bring about a clear and present danger of evils congress hates?

    			this would let them off the hook, in contrast to BT

    			we shouldn't punish people just for what they believe

    			even if you could infer intent to disrupt, they still shouldnt be punished

    				disagreement is not the beginning of defeat
    				it's a prerequisite for finding the truth

    			There's no clear and present danger given the context

    				therefore all that's getting punished is the view that the russian revolution was OK

    			HOLMES still thinks you can put people in jail for speech

    			but now he thinks we should have a default position of liberty

    				free speech should be the default
    				because the marketplace of ideas allows us to fin the truth


    		APPLICATION of CPD:

    			even if you find intent, there's no clear and presnt danger here

    			"it's a silly leaflet by an unkown man which has no chance of hindering the gov"

    				"puny anonymities"

    				who cares about these pathetic dorks?

    			THERE'S NO CHANCE THEY'VE ACTUALLY CREATED SOMETHING DANGEROUS

    			is he saying you can say anything you want as long as no one cares?


    		HOLMES takes a few positions:

    			if we stay with BT, we should raise the bar

    				we need to make it harder for gov to criminalize free speech

    			we should switch to CPD, though


    		How close is the metaphor of free speech to the marketplace?

    		Is free speech really about truth?

    			holmes says it is


    	We'll continue this trend away from BT after the break



    BREAK


    AN HOUR AGO:

    Freedom of Speech

    	-history of suppression
    	-theories of why free speech is good
    		none is embedded in const
    	-we started with the WWI treatment of free speech

    SCHENCK

    	bad tendency test
    	natural consequence and effect

    	is there any conceivable effect of this speech that could be damaging?

    	if yes, we can infer intent

    		once intent and and effect are established, guilty

    	prohibition on speech was still allowed

    		hurting the draft is like shouting fire


    	CLEAR AND PRESENT DANGER TEST

    		are words used in circumstances and of such a nature that they create a clear and presrnt danger of an evil that congress hates?

    		this focuses on the words, but also the context of the words


    FROHWERK AND DEBS

    	look at the utterance

    	is there a natural harmful effect

    		if yes, intent inferred

    	conviction upheld

    	in debs the bad effects were from one small component of a big speech


    ABRAMS

    	the maj justified bad tendency

    	it's easy to uphold convictions under BT

    	HOLMES:

    		took a new tack

    		he demanded specific proof of intent to cause bad effects

    		even if intent could be found, holmes wanted a different approach

    		he now wants freedom

    		he suggest use of the CPD test that arrives at DIFFERENT RESULTS than BT

    			this distinguishes holmes' attitudes from here from in SCHENCK

    			this would result in different outcomes

    		he know wants a MARKETPLACE OF IDEAS for the purpose of arriving at truth

    			so long as no CPD, let them talk

    			free exchange of ideas produces the most truthful outcomes

    		we should allow free debate because abrams is a puny anonymity

    			they pose NO REAL THREAT

    		holmes forecasts the future here

    		Four questions stay open:

    			how does holmes know this is the const's theory?
    			what roles does triviality play?
    				is speech less protected if it's more potent?
    			how meaningful is the marketplace metaphor?
    				why not regulate this marketplace like all the others?
    			is truth the only point of free expression?
    				self development, eg



    MOVING FORWARD:

    	from modern history to recent history

    	gov can still criminalize free expression even today

    		how hard should it be, though?

    		just like with EP, good reasons can justify infringements, says ct



    GITLOW v NEW YORK

    	state level red scare laws are at issue

    	when can gov supress free expression?
    	how will courts review?
    		with bad tendency test
    		or with CPD test

    	gitlow indicted for anarchism.  member of a left wing socialist group.

    		they created a manifesto that advocated overthrow of gov by force
    		gitlow violates the terms
    		the education and discussion of the idea is permitted under the statute
    		advocacy is forbidden


    	the state can act to protect itself under the police power (constitutional on face)

    	how do we know that gitlow advocated overthrow?

    		we don't, and dont need to

    		all we need to know:
    			do the words imply a tendency to action?
    				this is a bit like BT

    		we don't look to circumstance or context

    			we just look at the criteria in the law

    			so its more restrained than BT
    			it's deference to state leg

    				they made a list of shit that coutns as advocacy
    				ct defers to that

    			it's like BT
    				bc it results in convictions
    				deferential to state
    				easy to supress speech
    				no need to see if anyone acted on the speech
    				it's advocacy if it matches the criteria in the statute
    				default mode is gov suppression of speech
    				no attention to concrete circumstances or consequences

    	HOLMES:

    		goes back to CPD test

    		reasons why there should be no punishment here:

    			-this is just theory
    				we should be allowed to debate it! marketplace of ideas.
    				let the debate go! let the stupid idea fail.
    				this free competition of ideas bit is like abrams

    			--no chance of imminent uprising
    				the danger must be present as in imminent
    				this is someday talk
    				and unlikely to get up to speed anyhow
    				this is all a bit ridiculous



    WHITNEY v CALIFORNIA

    	whitney attends a convention to form a communist party
    	CA criminal syndicalism act prohibits it
    	her defense is that she only wanted moderate politics
    	but the statute criminalizes any participation in the party

    	ct maj uphold conviction

    		not by her intentions
    		rather by the letter of the statute
    			she was a knowing member of this org that advocates criminal behavior
    		she matches the statute, she's convicted, upheld

    	this is about collective activity

    		she's punished for her memberhsip in an organization

    		her specific ideas don't matter

    		because joint action is more problematic than isolated individual speech


    	BRANDEIS dissent (actually turned out a concurrence)

    		clear and present danger test

    		the speech has to pose an actual and imminent serious problem

    			irrational fears and paranoia aren't good enough

    			advocacy does not equate to imminence

    		we need a high threshold on the gov's ability to criminalize speech

    			if you prevent them from criminalizing this type of speech

    			you let time pass

    			the debate plays out, and the idea lives or dies on its merits

    			answer the speech with more speech

    				the solution to dangerous speech is more speech

    				expression should be met with expression not supression

    		this is different from holmes in terms of the benefits of more speech

    			[holmes sees the benefit of more free speech as truth]

    			-he admits we might get more truth
    			-he claims we might also get self-development
    				he asserts that this is the end of all gov
    			-he claims speech can be a stabilizing force on gov
    				silencing dissenters destabilizes gov by bottling tension
    				this is contrary to the deep history of FS
    			-helps with self governance

    		he's almost saying, maybe we should never supress speech
    			bottling that shit up can make ya crazy

    		this vision of free speech claims to align free speech with order
    			by limiting resentment
    			by leading us to self development
    			diversity of points of view/ market

    		He's continuing along the path that Holmes started

    		He adds reasons to the usual argument
    			-self dev
    			-self gov
    			-stabilizes by allowing venting

    	Speech suppression in times of crisis was common
    	Cases work their way up, and they all get upheld

    	In the middle of the 20th c, the swing changes



    DENNIS v US

    	Dennis indicted under smith act
    	he attempted to organize a communist party
    	he conspired to teach overthrow of US gov
    		he's not actually doing anyhting
    		but he's gathering people up
    		to chat about overthrow

    	Court decides not to use Whitney bc too deferential

    	They decide on CPD instead

    		they adopt the Learned Hand formulation:

    		gravity of the evil discounted by improbability of success

    			we're still looking to consequences (different from BT)
    			probability is from the CPD test
    			but it also allows the gov to criminalize way unlikely shit
    				so long as it's horribly evil to the gov
    				even a long shot can be prohibited if its dangerous
    			gov can move proactively if there's a grave evil at stake

    		Everyone agrees that communism is a serious evil

    			Brandeis requires serious harm in order to restrain suprression
    			here, seriousness empowers gov to supress

    	This all is almost like a step back to BT
    		it purports to distance itself from the deferntial old days
    		but it alters the CPD test
    		now it upholds criminalization of free speech
    	Frankfurter would have cited whitney

    	BLACK and DOUGLAS dissent


    BRANDENBURG v OHIO

    	KKK rally

    	court claims to repudiate Whitney

    	they assert the CPD test with teeth

    	TEST:

    		GOV can criminalize speech if there's advocacy that incites imminent lawless action
    		AND it is actually likely to produce that bad action

    		it's no longer enough to try to get someone to beleive something
    		you have to:
    			incite someone
    			to act now
    			and
    			your incitement is likely to work

    		This version of CPD is more like what Holmes and BRandeis talked about

    		it draws the line between idea and action

    	BRANDEBURG is a validation of the history of dissents

    	We'd expect brandenburg to robustly protect speech

    		if gov wants to abridge FS, they must satisfy SS

    		OR

    		it must satisfy the brandenburg test


    HOLDER v Humanitarian law project

    	the brandenburg test would protect the folks here
    	so, go to SS

    	point is national security
    	means = suppression
    		there's a better way to do this

    	Fails

    	this all happens in the dissent, though

    	MAJ:

    		coordination of any sort with terrorists is dangerous

    		if you free up resources here, they can devote that dough to terrorism

    		congress decided that there's to be no touching of terrorists

    			no matter the intention

    		this sounds a bit like whitney

    			both cases involve moderate folks trying to reign in some nutjobs

    		we get here a deferential test again that allows supression of speech

    			maybe holmes was right, and we only get free speech when it doesnt matter
    			as soon as theres conflict or danger, no more freedom


CON LAW DAY 22

    ... (missed some review to sign up for classes)

    We started free speech last time

    	Brandeis' dissent in Whitney continued the latterday Holmes approach


    Up until dennis, panic is grounds to suppress free speech


    DENNIS: clear and present danger test.  but it's the HAND FORMULA:

    	GRAVITY OF EVIL DISCOUNTED BY THE PROBABILITY OF SUCCESS


    BRANDENBURG TEST:

    	Great limit to what speech gov can prohibit:

    	Incitement to violence can be prohibited if you're inciting imminent lawless action that is actually likely to produce that action.

    	there must be a close link between speech and action

    	idle chatter about overthrow of the gov by force is not enough

    	if you fall outside, the gov can still reg

    	it must satisfy SS though


    Humanitarian law project:

    	Breyer says helping terrorists learn law is protected.

    	Breyer says they dont pass SS.  CGP, but not narrowly tailored

    	Breyer shows us how it should work.

    	Maj does an end run around.

    		any assistance you give them frees up resources for terrorism

    		congress has already done the balancing for us

    	even though this is after brandenburg, the court falls back on dennis and whitney and gitlow

    		the maj looks at what the statute says.

    		deferential

    		just because we have brandenburg doesn't mean we always have to use it

    		during times of crisis, the court will defer to legislature on free speech


    The overall trend of the 20th century is a trend toward protecting speech.

    	its not a guarantee though

    	smaller and smaller set of speech that can be criminalized

    	pattern of deference, though too


    These two days were all about dangerous speech





    Today is about FALSE STATEMENTS OF FACT

    	we'll see how and why the court protects them



    NEW YORK TIMES v SULLIVAN

    	famous case, 1964 (like brandenburg)

    	maj of the court wants speech-protective doctrinal tests

    	ALABAMA hick sues NYT for publishing allegedly libelous material


    	OFFICIAL IN HIS OFFICIAL CAPACITY

    		low bar to prove libel, brutal penalty


    	KEY BACKGROUND PRINCIPLE:

    		"DEBATE ON PUBLIC ISSUES SHOULD BE UNINHIBITED, ROBUST, AND WIDE-OPEN"

    		robust debate needs BREATHING SPACE

    		we can't pick out the lies and punish them

    		it would cause a CHILLING EFFECT


    	The pairing of a desire for ROBUST DEBATE and the understanding of CHILLING EFFECT

    		together they frame the case's approach


    	is there a difference between falsehood generally and defamation specifically?

    		not really

    		judges should have thick skin, and public officials too

    		the solution is not to allow the libel suits

    		the solution is for public people to nut up

    		criticism of public life is desirable


    	it does not matter if there's actual damage to a person's reputation

    		the damage to the quality of the debate is greater than the damage to the individual


    	THE TEST FOR DEFAMATION:

    		ACTUAL MALICE


    		this is more than just negligence

    		knowledge or reckless disregard is essential

    		under this test, NYT passes this test

    			they lacked the malice


    	THE COURT identifies a narrow window of speech that can be suppressed

    		they put the burden on the plaintiff to prove defamation

    		actual malice is a tough standard

    		Black (as in brandenburg): this is not enough


    	Public officials have a solution when they're libeled

    		MORE SPEECH

    		we need to let the market of ideas sort this out

    			(except where there's a pressing urgency)

    		the actual malice std is difficult to meet

    		mostly all public officials can do is respond with counter speech


    	SULLIVAN was about a public official engaged in official conduct

    		who is a public official, though?



    CURTIS v BUTTS and AP v WALKER

    	butts was an athletic director
    	brought action for libel
    	after an article accused him of game fixing
    	Walker led a march against civil rights protesters

    	neither is a pure public official

    	if they were public officials, they'd have to meet the Sullivan test

    		they do have to meet that std

    	they're public figures even if theyre not public officials

    		both categories enjoy public influence

    		they've put themselves forward as deciders

    		functionally they occupy similar roles

    	they have the means to speak against the libelous speech

    		they control enough of the debate to make their own remedy


    	This is a larger group, it includes many celebrities


    	same principles from sullivan:

    		open debate
    		no chilling

    	libel suits in these cases would result in too much SELF CENSORSHIP

    	treating public people this way serves the public debate

    	false statements themselves are not valuable
    	effective criticism and good self governance are the goal
    	false statements are the cost of doing business

    	HOW ABOUT PRIVATE INDIVIDUALS?


    GERTZ v ROBERT WELCH, INC

    	a cop (not gertz) shot a kid
    	someone published some article
    	Gertz sues and wins
    	did he meet the right standard?

    	if he's a public official, he's gotta prove actual malice
    	if he's a private individual, its some other std


    	the court does not require actual malice

    	the balance of interests here plays out in favor of protecting private people

    	the state has a greater interest in protecting the reps of private individuals

    		everyone has dignity the gov can and should protect

    		-private people don't has as much power to fight back with more speech

    		-public figures give some of it up by becoming public

    			private people don't volunteer up any of their interest in rep in exchange for power

    			there's an element of consent at play


    	gertz is not a public figure

    		he didn't volunteer himself up

    		he doesn't have power to speak back


    	The first amendment only needs to protect PUBLIC DEBATES

    		not every single argument between individuals


    	The court tries to strike a balance

    		SULLIVAN: public official in public capacity
    		BUTTS: private individual in public capacity
    		GERTZ: private individual in private capacity

    			the state interest in dignity is always there

    			it just counts for a lot less when talking about public people

    			in the discussion about private individuals, the public concerns disappear

    			and

    			the interest in dignity grows

    			THE LESS PUBLIC THE CONFLICT, THE LESS PROTECTED THE SPEECH

    			If the public debate is not at stake, the gov is empowered to act
    				to protect the state interest in individual dignity



    	What if we don't have a public issue?


    DUN & BRADSTREET v GREENMOSS BUILDERS

    	contractor is falsely reported as being bankrupt
    	five subscribers get this news
    	private individual at play

    	we're in the Gertz world, at best

    	the court goes further

    		the issue in question is not a public issue

    	it's a private issue involving private parties

    	The std for proving libel is not actual malice as in sullivan

    		it's much lower


    	NYT builds a framework

    		these other cases flesh out the limits



    US v ALVAREZ

    	congress enacts "stolen valor act"
    	prohibits claiming you won a military medal
    	these facts are not about libel
    	Alvarez is talking about himself

    	can false statements of fact be punished?

    	Greenmoss tells us that it can be easy

    		but this is different

    	there's a public concern

    		but he's telling lies about himself

    	CAN the gov punish a public figure for lying about his own record?

    		this doesnt fit with the ones before it

    	Kennedy:

    		Applies SS

    		this is problematic because it is so broad

    		it punishes a whole broad category of speech

    		it doesn't matter whether you're in public or private,
    		you can't lie about medals under this law

    	So we're not in one of the categories the gov can readily regulate

    		therefore the std should be pretty high

    	Fit:

    		Horizontal and Vertical

    		Vertical: means must actually serve the goal

    		Horizontal fit is a problem here

    			there are ways the gov could protect the meaning of medals
    			WITHOUT suppressing free speech

    			the gov could also just do nothing and let the public expose alvarez

    			the gov could publish database of MoH winners
    				it would facilitate counterspeech


    	BREYER:

    		also thinks it should fail, even under IS

    		it's a FR, you wanna reach for SS

    		but we got False statements of Fact

    			not the most important speech

    		therefore IS, but still this fails

    		This sliding scale approach is like marshall in san antone v rodriguez
    			or like plier v doe


    	ALITO:

    		he would uphold this under RBR
    		there's no chilling here
    		it prevents harm to military
    		there's no debate at stake


    TEST CHANGE
    Another test change

    law-notes/con-law



CON LAW DAY 23


    NYT v SULLIVAN

    	a PUBLIC OFFICIAL IN HIS OFFICIAL CONDUCT must prove ACTUAL MALICE for libel

    		knowingly false or reckless disregard for falsehood

    		hard to meet

    		VERY PROTECTIVE OF CRITICS

    	The court wants a wide-open, ROBUST PUBLIC DEBATE in order to advance good self government

    		lies, falsehoods, and vitriol is all included

    		No holds barred

    	The court should not excise false statements from the debate

    		they have no intrinsic value

    		but they should be protected because

    		CHILLING EFFECT

    	High std of proof burden put on public officials

    		so that we can have a nice solid debate


    CURTIS BUTTS WALKER

    	public figures seem like public officials

    		theyre both involved in public matters

    		and they affect the disposition

    		they're advantageously positioned relative to the mass media

    	therefore they get the same std:  actual malice


    GERTZ

    	private individuals should not have to meet the actual malice std

    		the state has an interest in the preservation of individual dignity

    			but here, private individuals have not offered themselves up to the public

    			they also have less capability to protect themselves in mass media

    		the court sees them as more deserving of protection

    	but it can't be ludicrously easy

    		no presumed damages
    		no punitive damages

    	there's a balance between private individuals's dignity and free speech

    		dignity wins here, opposite of sullivan



    DUN and BRADSTREET v GREENMOSS

    	private people

    	where there's no public issue involved,

    		no worry about chilling

    		digniity interest remains

    	therefore states can have punitive and presumed damages along with a pltf-favorable std



    	THE FURTHER WE GET FROM A PUBLIC DEBATE, THE LESS PROTECTED THE SPEECH

    		sliding scale



    ALVAREZ

    	how does the court know if it's dealing with a public debate issue or not?

    		plurality (KENNEDY):  gov tries to intervene in a first amendment debate

    			it's not libel about an individual

    			it would give the gov a power to police for truth anywhere in public

    			this is an abridgement

    			they apply SS

    			it fails

    		ALITO:

    			he sees this as like greenmoss

    			false statements of fact

    			no consitutional value

    			NO CHILLING EFFECT

    			no self censorship

    			he applies RBR

    		BREYER:

    			tries goldilocks approach

    			false statements can be of value in a public debate

    			but not as valuable as the true statements

    			therefore we should apply IR




    1. FIRST AMENDMENT IS A FR

    	gov must show compelling interest and narrowly tailored

    	that means subject to SS

    2. THE COURT HAS ID'D CERTAIN KINDS OF EXPRESSION THE GOV cAN MORE EASILY REGULATE

    	-clear and present danger
    	-speech inherently of low value (false stmts)

    	these kind of speech can be subjected to regs that do not need to survive SS

    	instead, they have to pass [the brandenburg test]

    		[
    		-speech to incite
    		-likely to incite
    		]

    3.  GOV CAN REGULATE STUFF THAT DOESN'T HAVE TO DO WITH THE CONTENT OF SPEECH

    	eg noise ordinances
    	time, manner, place
    	if they dont address the content, no need to sweat SS

    	they're not about speech and content

    	gov regs on conduct don't have to pass SS



    	THIS FRAMEWORK reduces a lot of cases to the question:

    		which category do we belong in?




    FALSE STATEMENTS LAST TIME

    SYMBOLIC CONDUCT THIS TIME

    	how do we know if symbolic action counts as speech?





    US v OBRIEN

    	some kids burn their draft cards

    	the court does not apply SS,

    		despite the kid asserting that he was doing first amendment stuff

    	they ask for an important or substantial gov interest

    		this is like IR

    	4 part obrien test:

    		-within gov's constitutional power
    		-important gov interest
    		-interest is unrelated to supression of free speech
    		-least restricive method (lowest possible impact on 1A rights)

    		the purpose of the test is to make sure the gov is regulating the nonspeech element

    		if the gov was regulating the speech element, SS applies

    			if gov fails the obrien test, then we default to SS

    	key issue of this case:

    		UNITY OF SPEECH AND ACTION

    		the same action can have speech elements and nonspeech elements

    		but the court can't just treat everything with speech elements as speech

    			that would draw in a shitload of other acts

    			speech through conduct could be almost anything

    				even robbing could be a political expression against tax code
    				urination on the courthouse steps...
    				anarchy via 1a


    		IF ITS THE NONSPEECH ELEMENT BEING REGULATED, SS DOES NOT APPLY

    			it's not a law on the viewpoint
    			it's a law on the conduct

    		the four part test helps us to figure out whether an act is speech or conduct

    			this test is a bit like the brandenburg test

    				total free speech means chaos
    				total fre symbolic speech means chaos

    			but it's not about what might happen (speech effect on others, who affect order)
    			it's about how much we want to let him get away with (speech effect on order)


    	APPLICATION:

    		-the gov has the constitutional power to reg here
    		-the gov interest in smooth administration is important enough here
    		-the interest is about administration, not speech
    		-the impact is incidental because he could express himself in other ways



    		This is all over the board, SS, IR, RBR

    		admin convenience is a substantial interest for the court here



    NUDE DANCING
    LIVE NUDE GIRLS
    PASTIES AND A G STRING

    	these cases show us how the court works out the fuzziness of the doctrine

    	they also reject the obrien test (it's not deferential enough for them)


    BARNES

    	indiana public indecency law

    	live nude dancing is the conduct

    	eroticism is its message

    	the court applies the obrien test

    		-states have the police power to make this law
    		-the gov has a substantial interest in morality and safety possibly
    		-it's an interest unrelated to the interest in suppressing free speech
    			it's a general law, applicable to speech and nonspeech contexts
    		-there's only an incidental effect because there's still plenty of erotic stuff
    			pasites and a g string only minimally impact the message
    			the message can still be communicated even if nude dancing is shutdown

    		the law satisfies obrien, debate over

    	WHITE: this is a general law, sure, but its only being applied to nude dancing

    		the gov hates this speech and its content

    		he'd apply SS

    	SOUTER: maybe nudity here produces secondary problems that aren't about speech

    		SECONDARY EFFECTS can give a the gov grounds to reg

    	SCALIA: it's a general law, regulates conduct not speech



    CITY OF ERIE v PAP'S AM

    	city makes a ban on live nude dancing
    	it's a targeted law, not a general ban on nudity

    	they apply obrien test

    		-police power
    		-substantial interest
    			in safety RE: secondary effects
    			they also see a general purpose
    			which allows them to fare better on the next prong
    		-the interest is unrelated
    		-incidental effect bc pasties and g string OK

    	SCALIA: its a conduct law, no Q of FR, no SS, only RBR



CON LAW DAY 24:

    REVIEW:

        we did three kinds of free speech analysis

            -dangerous speech
            -false speech
            -symbolic speech

        Symbolic Speech

            key case: OBRIEN

                four part test

                    if fails, apply SS
                        bc they're targeting speech
                    if passes, gov has more wiggle room
                        bc they're targeting action

                protected all symbolic speech causes anarchy

                4 factors of obrien test:

                    -within gov's constitutional power?
                    -furthers an important or substantial interest? (like IR)
                    -UNRELATED TO THE SUPPRESSION OF SPEECH?
                    -incidental restriction/ narrowest tailoring?

                    it's a deferential test, easy for gov to satisfy

                    smooth administration (normally only good for RBR) flies here

                how good is the court at applying the test?

                    when will they recognize targeting of speech?
                    how easily can they determine if the state's interest is unrelated?

                LIVE NUDE DANCING can be prohibited

                    because its a de minimis impact on speech

                SCALIA thinks it's all conduct, no speech

                    he thinks the obrien test is TOO difficult

                    he'd only apply RBR

                WHITE thinks it's all speech

                    the gov wants to shut down the erotic message

                SOUTER thinks the gov's interest is in secondary crime prevention

            CITY OF ERIE v PAPS AM

                the city advances the souter secondary interest

                but the court says, nah, you don't mean that

                they find a workable interest for the gov

                they see a general interest

                they spin the situation to satisfy the obrien test


    TODAY:

        WE TACKLE FREEDOM OF RELIGION AND ANTIESTABLISHMENT

        ORIGINALISM is a big approach in this context

            what were the framers really thinking?

        TEXTUALISM is big too

            what to the precise words do to impact it all?



        WE DO FIVE BROAD ISSUES INSTEAD


            1- what is the SCOPE of the establishment clause?

                was it designed to prevent the gov from preferring one over another?

                    this would allow the gov to support religion

                or was it made to prevent the gov from favoring religion over non-religion?

                    this is a vision of strict separation and neutrality

            2- what can the first amendment guarantees of free exercise and est mean as our society changes?

                we have more divsersity now than at the founding
                we have a MUCH larger gov, regulates more of our lives

                    blaisdell: the gov must reg to allow us our liberties
                    this would mean the est clause shrinks

            3- what is the problem the est clause is trying to address?

                historically there was tax and attendance coercion
                    a narrow view of est clause says this only is prohibited
                    a broader view is that the clause prevents any gov endorsement of religion

            4- who is protected by the establishment clause?

                does it protect the gov from religion?

                    protects our political disputes from becoming theological disputes, which would make compromise harder

                does it protect religion from gov?

                    religious groups would start to care about gov
                    theyd become concerned with the affairs of the world

            5- what is the meaning of "religion" in the first amendment?

                what counts?  should anything and everything count?
                how does gov decide what religion is?
                they can't just let us each define it for ourselves
                    it's the free speech anarchy problem
                    "i wasnt speeding i was praying"


            NOT ALL OF THESE COME UP IN EVERY CASE

                but they all flow along the broad/narrow divide

                guarantee of free exercise suggests broad support of rel
                anti est clause suggests a limit on that

        EVERSON v BOARD OF EDUCATION

            FACTS: gov subsidizes catholic private schools

            [traditionally the sponsored one religion and blocked others]
            [the colonies developed the same old problems]
            [VA blocks a law to support a state church]

            Jefferson:

                "true religion did not need the support of law"
                "God hath created the mind free"

                it's a religious argument for religious tolerance

                these arguments fall on the ears of their contemporaries well

                        it lets strong religion permeate society

            What does the est clause mean?

                the gov cannot:

                    set up a church
                    force attendance
                    forbid attendance
                    use tax money to support a church
                    participate in any religious group

                there's a wall of separation between religion and fed

                    so we can have stronger religion

            NEW JERSEY WAS ALLOWED TO USE TAXPAYER MONEY TO SUBSIDIZE RELIGION

                how can we reconcile that?

                there's an AMENITIES ARGUMENT:

                    you can't take an amenity away from a religious group
                    est clause is powerful until it hits free exercise

                    you can't separate the practice of religion from to provision of gov services

                        "everyone gets this except you"
                        "we can't use taxpayer money to put out the fire in a church" sounds too crazy to the court

                        you can't stop building a sidewalk in front of a church

                    this frees up money for the church to evangelize, though

                        this logic is not accepted here

                    the separation is to allow true religion to flourish

                        est and free ex clause both point to the goal of promotion of religion in the mind of the court

        LEE v WEISMAN

            FACTS: school had a rabbi give a nonsectarian prayer at graduation

                a rabbi gives a prayer
                but the ceremony was effectively mandatory
                it was

            the student sues becauase the prayer is a violation of the establishment clause

                [there's gonna be two different tests for EST and FE]

            THE GOV ACTED. set up by school.

                managed by the school and permitted by the principle

            THE GOV HERE TRIES TO ADVANCE RELIGION GENERALLY

                just because theyre not advancing one single religion, theyre not off the hook

                the oppressors claim it's all just american, no big deal

                SCALIA: we say this stuff all the time without thinking of it as religious

                the court doesnt buy the bullshit

                it's a civic religion that the gov is trying to endorse

                    just because it's broadly acceptable to religions across a spectrum doesnt mean that youre not trying to create a religion

                    the fact it doesnt map to any one religion doesnt excuse your shit

            HAS THE GOV ESTABLISHED A RELIGION?

                Kennedy IDs objections and handles them

                O: curriculum involves distasteful ideas often.  this prayer is no big deal in comparison.

                    K: doesn't hold water.  there's a difference between freedom of speech in the classroom and freedom of religion here.

                        the goal of free speech is to find truth the gov can act on

                        the goal of free religion is not to impact gov action

                O: this is not establishment bc no coercion. you don't have to go, you don't have to pray.

                    K: there is coercion

                        graduation is important, norms make it compulsory even in absence of an official rule

                        there's no viable way to not participate

                        the coercion is there

                            coercion can be social, psychological

                    K: there's no such thing as non-participation

                O: the reason for the prayer is because graduation is so important. we render it more solemn.  it dignifies the event.

                    K: it forgets about the dissenters.

                        you can't take the perspective of the gov or an adherent.

                        why not just tell the dissenters to sit?  because then the individual dissenter must protect his own right.

                            it'd be like saying "gov can censor, you just have to find a way to avoid it" != free speech protection

            SCALIA: writes dissents for law students.

                he sees consequences to nonsectarian prayer

                but theyre different from the madison jefferson concerns

                nonsectarian prayer is a unifying mechanism for different religions

                he sees minimal inconvenience for the dissenters

                and

                major benefits to the sheep

                it wouldnt have the same effect at home

                it's important that it's nonsectarian and public

                he dissents but channels the logic of the everson opinion


CON LAW DAY 25

	REVIEW SESSIONS: 12/15 - 12/17  T,W,Th 1-3 Rm 434

	REVIEW:

		five kinds of issues:

			-what is the scope of establishment clause?
				to prohibit favoring one religion
				to prohibit favoring religion

			-what of the changes since the founding?
				growth in diversity in US religions
				extension of the new deal blaisdell gov

			-what is the relationship to coercion?
				historically this was a big concern
				is there a broader definition now
				is mere endorsement violative
				what is the breadth of the definition of coercion

			-what is the est clause there to do?
				is it pitted against the free exercise clause
				is it there to protect religion from gov
				maybe they both trend toward allowing religion to thrive

			-what is the meaning of religion in the first amendment?
				can it be totally self defined (anarchy!)
				can the court come up with a definition
					is a gov definition an est clause problem
		EVERSON:

			dicta suggests a total wall between church and state
			holding is contrary to that though
				church subsidy is upheld

			how to reconcile?

				the idea is that the establishment clause serves true religion
				freely given conviction is the hallmark of true religion

				to fail to pay for transportation would be the equivalent

					of denying sidewalks, fire fighting, etc to church
					it would make the state the adversary of religion

				it's about making sure the gov can't intrude

				the gov can fund religion, so long as it does so neutrally

		LEE v WEISMAN:

			school gives a prayer at graduation

			violates est clause

				bc its coercive
				not de jure, but de facto

					adolescents feel those social pressures
					theyll feel compelled to at least act like theyre playing

				coercion is contextual under this version of the est clause

			theres a difference between religion and speech

				you should have to hear things you don't want to

					the clash of ideas produces stability, truth, self gov

				religion is different

					the state is not the target of persuasion in religious debate

					we don't want gov to adopt religion
					we want religion to be personal

					even if we all agreed, we don't want the gov in the religion biz

			There's a coherent argument here, but no tidy doctrine

				we don't know quite what to do with the next case

		The Lemon test is the main doctrinal test

			but the court is ambivalent about the test though

			it's present, but the court uses and abuses it

				keeps it close, tosses it aside

			does it violate est clause?

			THREE COMPONENTS:

				-does the gov have a secular purpose?
				-what is the primary effect?
					is it to enhance or protect a religion?
				-does the gov action promote excessive administrative entanglement with religion?

			Everson:

				-secular purpose is to promote education
				-primary effect is to provide universal general services
				-admin entanglement minimal no prob

			Lee v Weisman:

				-secular purposeis to solemnize
				-primary effect is to advance religion (PROBLEMATIC)
				-minimal entanglement no prob


	TODAY:

		Lynch v Donnelly

			Pawtucket RI displays holiday decorations including a nativity scene

			Court breaks out Lemon test

				-secular purpose is to celebrate the season
				-court sees no effect of advancing religion
					(maybe an incidental indirect effect of advancing rel)
					they know this because it's analogous to museum displays
				-entanglement is no prob. it's cheap and easy to store.
					no religious involvement in the gov's dealings

			OCONNOR is a little unhappy with all this

				uncertainty about whether it's really advancing religion or not

				she develops the ENDORSEMENT TEST

				two ways for violations of est clause to happen

					entanglement and endorsement

						entanglement compromises religious independance

						endorsement is like a combo of lemon purp and effect

							endorsement can include coercion
							but it doesnt have to in order to violate

					they both have in common that they effect a person's standing in the political community

						entanglement ties the two up
						endorsement makes insiders and outsiders

					if some gov action causes your religion to become meaningful in the political community, it violates the est clause

				she looks at purpose and effect too

					she just frames it in a way that she thinks is more useful doctrinally

				she claims they don't intend to endorse christianity

					they just want to celebrate the holiday

				she claims the action doesn't have the effect of endorsing religion

					the intended message is not endorsement
					the received message is not endorsement

				she COMPARES TO MONEY not museums

					money uses 'in god we trust' but it's merely solemnizing and giving a sense of a positive future

					no endorsement of deistic religions over nondeistic
					no endorsement of religion over nonreligion

				THIS IS A LOT LIKE THE MAJORITY SO FAR

					celebrate season
					depict "historical" origins of holiday

					it's not religious just like in god we trust

					but also

				it caused NO POLITICAL DIVISIVENESS

					it met no opposition

						this is evidence that the message received was nonreligious

			BRENNAN

				rejects all this

					he says its demeaning to christians to say it carries no religious weight

					he shows a lack of actual historical support for public celebration of christmas

					he thinks there can't be a secular purpose to displaying an inherently religious symbol

					he thinks there can be no effect but advancement of religion in displaying an inherently religious symbol

				He's willing to put up with a lot of bullshit, to be sure

					but he's just not convinced in this case


		MUELLER V ALLEN

			income tax incentive for sending kids to private [religious] shcools

				we have in paractice an advantage only available to parents who send their kids to religious schools

			the court applies the lemon test and finds no problem

				-ct: the secular purpose is to broadly advance education
				-ct: the effect is to advance education but not religion
				-ct: no excessive entanglement

			that its in fact a subsidy to religious schools doesn't matter to the court

				ct: the money doesn't really go all the way to the school
					the gov subsidy is for parents.  gov responsibility ends there
					the parents's choice launders the money constitutionally

				they decline to look to empirical evidence that the gov is subsidizing the church

				they spin private education as releiving the burden on public schools

				there's no entanglement bc this is just any old deduction

					no need for entanglement with religious schools

			THE COURT ONLY CARES ABOUT FORMAL EQUALITY

				not about following through to see effects

				think strader:

					EP gives you formal access, but no guarantee of a mixed jury

				think washington and mcklesky:

					racially discriminatory results are not enough
					effects alone arent enough

			The Lemon test claims to care about effects alone

				but they dont live up to that

			Ostensibly, if you fail any prong you violate the est clause

				mere effect of advancing religion violates, supposedly

			The court, to make up for it, decides how far to follow the effects

				the buck stops with the parents for the ct's analysis


		ZELMAN V SIMMONS-HARRIS

			voucher programs subsidize private schools

			not a tax deduction, but money to pay tuition

				if public school, the school gets bonus funding
				if private school, the church gets the funding

				very direct

			LEMON TEST:

				-secular purpose?
				-primary effect of advancing religion?
				-excessive entanglement?

				-there is a secular purpose of educating poor children

				-the primary effect is not to advance religion, but rather to advance education

					not all the money goes to religious schools

						maj: channels everson
						souter: any amount to church is a problem

					again, the parents's choice launders the tax money

						souter: there is no real choice here

							religious schools are really the only choice

							you can't innoculate the state with the parents choice argument if the parent's don't have a real choice

							no firewall unless there's a meaningful choice

						maj:  there is a real choice at play

							there are other options
							there's disincentives to send kids to religious schools

								magnet schools get more money

						THIS CASE:

							similar to mueller
								applies lemon test
								state no helping religion, helping families

							different to mueller
								ct focuses more on realness of choice
								more direct subsidy to church

							there's no primary effect as long as parents choose

					starting in lynch v donnelly, court looks to

						CONTEXT
						HISTORY
						INTERMEDIARY CHOICE

						in each case, gov supports religion
						but not in a way they find violative of the est clause

					ct's weird about lemon.  these cases are fact-intensive


		TOWN OF GREECE v GALLOWAY

			town starts legislative sessions with prayer
			ministers give sectarian invocations

			KENNEDY:

				writes for maj

				talks about the long history of legislative prayer

					first congress opened with prayer
					old as our gov itself

					he claims history doesnt decide it, but provides context

					tips in favor of constitutionality

				est clause limits on the kinds of prayers:

					they could rotate through religions
					a few sectarian prayers would be fine too
					one person's objection alone is not enough
						no heckler's veto
					reasonable observer test
						comes from OCONNOR
						if a very well informed person heard the prayer and saw it as consistent with the history, no prob
						as long as it's made to give a sense of collective confidence, it's fine

				gov can't censor or inspect the prayers beforehand

					that's an example of entanglement
					happens to violate the leg of lemon test

				THE LEMON TEST IS NOT EXPLICITLY USED

					but we can map the case to it nonetheless

			KAGAN:

				writes for dissenters
				she sees est clause problem

				she imagines a muslim woman observer instead

					that observer would feel excluded from the political community because of her religious belief

					she'd feel excluded from the [zoning] discussion

					she'd be an outsider or she's forced to pray as a christian

				Kagan says we pick our imaginary observer from the perspective of a religiously pluralistic society

					if the dissenting minority feels like there's no endorsement, then there's no endorsement
