RET DAY 2

Clients don’t pay for critical thinking, they pay for strategic action.

MARSH v WALLACE

Marsh wants the properties because he really wants the cash flow

his willingness to restructure the deal is evidence of his desire for the cash

the representations of the history of the cash flow is a sticking point for this reason


attempt one: I’ll buy the thing with my own financing

BUT: can’t get financing

attempt two: I’ll take the thing, along with your debts, and the rest can be financed by the seller

BUT: can’t get around the due-on-sale clauses, bank won’t allow it

attempt three: We’ll buy the LLCs (see slide show)

BUT: is this even a RET?


use and enjoyment
exclusion of others
transfer to whoever
profits (mainly in the form of appreciation)


You have rights to these things under property law unless the lender says you can’t do these things


in the third transaction, they’re buying assets.  no deed. maybe no mortgage.  it’s a RET, but its a non-property transaction.  This is like a merger and acquisition.  the land is still owned by the same entity, but the entity is now controlled by another.  it’s an end run around the lender.

the savvy lender should write an extra paragraph that locks the individual in and the entity.  


the three different modes require three different sets of documents


the bummed out buyer wants to sue the seller, because they think they got fraudulent misrepresentations from the seller.

the court says no.

buyer can’t recover from the seller.  the buyer now says the lawyer fucked up.

buyer succeeds in this and lawyer howell is on the hook for 20k in legal fees.


how much info is full info?


howell used to work for the seller.  seller is gonna get some dough from the sale.  the dough is gonna pay howell.

howell has an incentive to push the deal through, even if it sucks for the buyer (who he’s supposed to represent)

he has a conflict of interest

howell has perhaps not clarified who he represents.  maybe he doesn’t even know.



WRITE THE AGREEMENT: what services, how payment, any disclosures

get the things signed and put it in the file

the client usually doesn’t care about these kinds of things, they’ll sign off

write a nice little letter, just to clarify that I’m at the closing to represent the bank, and I do not represent you, you should get your own attorney to represent your own interest

courts will often allow the suit if the party has any reasonable basis for thinking you represent them

as part of documenting the deal, build this little barrier


DUTY OF LOYALTY
DUTY OF CONFIDENCE
DUTY OF DISCLOSURE


END CHAPTER ONE

CH 2 Broker’s responsibilities

WOLK v PAINO

the suit is not about failure to disclose a defect (mold)

it’s about failure to insist on an inspection


Wolk read and signed, waiving the inspection


sometimes the rules of disclosure change if you ask a direct question

AS A LAWYER, create a list of direct questions to ask the broker about (crime, HIV, etc…)



HOLMES v SUMMER

HILLIS v LAKE

the broker gets the commission when the procure a ready, willing, and able buyer

no closing is necessary

this is a MA case, and they have a minority rule:

no closing, no commish

exception:

if the seller causes the transaction not to close, the buyer gets commish anyhow

seller must be at fault

he is at fault if the buyer could sue for breach of contract



the deal doesn’t close here because there’s environmental contamination

so they try to put together another deal

lake is one of the buyers, puts up a third

lake is also the lender on the second deal, tenants will make monthly payments to him


RULE: if the second deal is essentially the same as the first deal, broker is entitled to the commish

are these two deal substantially the same?

broker argues yes, but the risk allocation is much different

the risk disparity is enough for the court to say they’re two different deals altogether and therefore no commission



