Computer Crimes Day 1
1/14/16

    Themes:

        uncertainty about whether this is a separate discipline

        3 big questions:

            How is a computer crime committed?
                -substantive criminal law
                -legal relevance of difference in MO

            How is evidence collected?
                -crim pro overlap
                -relevance of collection methods

            What jdx questions are raised?

        Privacy and the 4th Amendment

        employing a computer to commit an old-fashioned crime

            vs

        going places in a computer system where you're not allowed
        and blocking users from accessing places places they have a right to

        inadequacy of old laws in the world of computers

        status of digital information as property

            it is because:

                -money is paid to develop the code
                -company enjoys an advantage bc of the code
                -the company works to protect it

Computer Crimes Day 2
1/19/16

    NEW PROSECUTORIAL THEORY:  UNAUTHORIZED ACCESS

        most computer crimes now involve UA + X

            where X is doing harm, taking info, etc

        18 USC Sec. 1030

            prohibits ACCESS to a PROTECTED COMPUTER, WITHOUT AUTHORIZATION

        1030e2B p15

            everything that runs on software or stores data is a COMPUTER, more or less

                including laptops, cell phones, thumb drives, servers
                also anything connected to the internet

            PROTECTED COMPUTER means

                any gov computer
                any bank computer
                any computer connected to the internet

            This amounts to a tremendous expansion of federal criminal jdx across the world over billions of computers.

                The policy implications of this are monumental and unexamined

        1030a1

            UA to obtain classified gov secrets, never actually used

        1030a2  *big one

            #1 anti-hacking-statute!  Fuck you Aaron!

                intentionally accessing a computer without enough auth and obtains info

                obtains info includes just reading the info

        1030a3

            trespass, rarely used, only for gov computer

        1030a4

            computer misuse that furthers a fraud

        1030a5 *big one

            UA and cause damage

            this is the one for viruses

            split into 3:

                -reckless
                -knowingly
                -causes

            intentional access of a protected computer, and causes intended harm:

                life sentence

                eg if you disrupt traffic control and cause deaths and crashes, life

        1030a6

            password trafficking.  includes sharing passwords. 10 year felony.

        1030a7

            extortion

        1030b

            attempt of any of the above is treated as success

        damage

            means impairment to the integrity or availability of data, a program, a system, or info

            a mere trespass can give a bank a reason to replace a whole system, which can be considered damage under this definition

        loss

            any reasonable cost to any victim

        1030g

            anyone who suffers damage or loss can bring a civil suit

            this creates a computer tort

    WHAT IS ACCESS?

        focus is on rights, not property interest or deprivation

        virtual or physical?

        State v Riley

            early brute force attack

            statutory definition of access = approach = guilt

        State v Allen

            knocking on the door != guilt

        Email == access

        Port scans != access

        Access is very broad, so authorization becomes the limiting concept

        take access for granted, inquire into authorization

        US v MORRIS

            intended function test *

            cornell student has an account, but he wants to point out the security failures

            he brings down the entire internet at the point when it was a few thousand computers

            he used his email account.  but it's not "exceeding authorization"

            it's not the intended function, so it's "w/o authorization"

        Whether or not you can qualify something as a "code-based barrier" affects your culpability

            if you get past a code based barrier, you're sunk

        US v NOSAL

            guy steals proprietary info from his employer and kills the biz

            court decides sensibly by reading the statute narrowly on policy grounds

            no other circuit is willing to do that, though

Computer Crimes Day 3
1/26/16

    See slides.

    Mens Rea is the only thing that stops innocent users from regularly stumbling into midemeanor liability under 1030a5

    1030 defines loss but not value.  Batti gets at the issue.

        if no market value, any reasonable method for calculating it flies
