Immigration Law Day 1
01/14/16

    atkim@law.syr.edu

    liberal marginal notes are permitted in the statutory supplement for the final exam

    *go back and focus on the overview from the first assignment

    Themes:

        laws affecting the ability of non-us citizens to enter the US as immigrants or visitors

        the bases of removal of non us citizens from the US

        disparity of rights between citizens and non citizens

        exceptionalism of immigration law

    Substance:

        federal role in immigration, broad power of congress over regulation of immigration

            -fed over state
            -within fed gov, tensions between branches

        AG's delegation of power to INS, and the mixing of processing and enforcement

        the effect of 9/11 on restructuring

            USCIS now handles benefits
            ICE and CBP handle enforcement

        limited rights of non-citizens at the border

            for purposes of constitutional rights, the border (JFK) is not US territory

        DOJ still handles adjuticative stuff at EOIR, some suggest they shoudlnt

        DOS admits or denies viasa, oversees refugee program, weighs in on vocational stuff

        HHS handles refugee resettlement, and denies some immigrants on health grounds

            HHS also shelters kids from expedited removal

        The practical arguments for increasing the number of visas are winning over the moral reasons.  Tech sector wants to fight the brain drain.

        The diversity lottery is relatively small

            state dept website has quotas available

        History:

            1776-1875:  No restrictions.  We needed human capital.

            1875-1917:  Convicts and prostitutes barred.  Expanded to mentally ill, poor, and Chinese.

            1917-1924: First comprehensive statute. adds literacy test and numerical limits.  Quota law wasn't just about numbers.  facially nationality neutral, but gave preference to nationalities that already had a lot of people in the US.

                Opposition: The national quotas were about racism.

                    this is inconsistent with our constitutional values

                Support:  The national quotas were about facilitating assimilation.

                    it makes a more homogenous culture, and therefore prevents conflict

            1965 act abolished the quota system in an effort to end discrimination

                responds to the civil rights act

            1990 immigration act sets current ceiling

        Sources of Federal Immigration Power

            SCOTUS: congress has complete power about aliens.

                "over no conceivable subject is the legislative power of Congress more complete than it is over the admission, exclusion, and expulsion of aliens"

            they have plenary power over this area. judicial review is decidedly limited.

            the federalism argument for supremacy has morphed toward separation of powers

                congress is powerful over the states, sure
                but does this mean that congress can beat up on executive?

                    can executive protect undocumented by executive order?

            the constitution doesn't expressly give the power to congress

                that doesn't make what they've been doing unconstitutional

                it's unworkable to permit the states to handle immigration

            SOURCE ONE:  the commerce clause

                congress may regulate commerce with foreign nations

                but people aren't commerce

                but we've interpreted this to mean that congress has broad powers over anything substantially related to interstate commerce


Immigration Law Day 2
01/19/16

    Four enumerated powers provide Congress's Power to regulate immigration

        -The Commerce Clause
        -The Migration or Importation Clause
        -The Naturalization Clause
        -The War Clause

        Commerce:

            people affect commerce
            the commerce clause has been read broadly to allow congress to reg anything that substantially affects commerce

        Migration:

            gives congress power by implication
            history suggests its about slaves, though

        Naturalization:

            but immigration != naturalization
            admission and exclusion don't exactly fall neatly into naturalization
                however, with help from the N&P clause:

                if congress can say that only people who have x, y, and z characteristics can be naturalized, then they can deny access to those who don't have x, y, and z

                    but we often admit people who we never expect to be naturalized

        War:

            congress can exclude alien enemies while we're at war
            with n&p and war clause together, congress may admit alien friends

            you could argue for a peacetime power here:

                we can admit aliens in order to PREVENT war with a nation

    There's a limit to the enumerated sources of congressional power to reg immigration

    So scholars reach to imlied constitutional powers

        -what limits exist on the federal power to reg immigration?
        -to what extent do non-citizens enjoy rights under the U.S. Constitution?

    CHAE CHAN PING v US aka the CHINESE EXCLUSION CASE

        CONTEXT:

            written by a politically active judge who promoted anti-immigration legislation

            in the context of strong anti-chinese sentiment that grew from labor market realities

                Professor Kim frames the hate as growing from cultural differences as a lack of desire to assimilate

                there's also an invocation of national security in the debate

            "National Core" model of citizenship: we're a white protestant nation and newcomers should have to assimilate

        FACTS:

            Chinese laborer blocked from reentry by a law passed while he was sailing back

        ISSUES:

            Does the law violate the US's treaty obligations with China?

                no.

            Does the law violate the US Constitution?

                no.

                his certificate was a a revocable licesne granted by congress.

                his lawyered argued that congress didn't have the enumerated power under the constitution to deny him entry

                    it should be left to the states under the tenth

                the court responds:

                    the power over immigration is an inherent sovereign power

                    three theories of implied delegation:

                        -general foreign affairs power
                        -structural theories
                        -obviousness theory

                        even if we accept a general foreign affairs power, it's not clear that immigration falls into that zone

        HOLDING:

            (1) congress has the power to exclude non citizens because it is inherent in what it means to be a sovereign state

            (2) the decision by congress to exclude Mr Ping is conclusive on the judiciary

                in other words, courts can't review a federal statute about immigration
                another way, it's constitutional because congress said so

                THIS IS INCONSISTENT with judicial review from marbury v madison

                    it gives too much power to one branch (leg)

                Should a person who has connections to the country have a bigger bundle of constitutional rights?

                SCOTUS cited this case in 2002, 10th circuit cited it in 2004

                extent of congressional power and ability of courts to review^

    LIMITS TO THE FEDERAL IMMIGRATION POWER?

        are there any?
        can the court declare the limits?

        EKIU v US

            ISSUE:  Does a lack of judicial review of an administratitive denial of admission violate Ekiu's due process rights?

                contrast to ping, who says, "you don't have the power"
                here, ekiu says, "you have the power, but you didn't do it right"

                ping argues about the existence or non existence of a power
                ekiu argues about the proper handling of an admitted power

                is the HOLDING 1 or 2?

                    1- Ekiu enjoys due process rights, but Congress did not violate them by entrusting the fact finding exclusively to administrative officials

                        this version of the holding would suggest that the court had some review

                    2- Congress alone decides to what extent constitutional due process rights exist at all in exclusion cases

                        in this version, the court has no capacity for review

                    It's 2:

                        god doesn't say it because it's right, it's right because god declares it to be so

                        here, congress is god

        FONG YUE TING

            [third leg of the congressional plenary power stool.]

            Congress passes a law requiring a certificate of residence for all chinese residents in the US, unless the chinese person could find a credibel white witness to testify to his residency.

            Chinese laborer gets arrested w/o a CR, and that makes them deportable

            The court finds that the gov can deport noncitizens with the same authority that they can exclude noncitizens

                because:

                    -political question
                    -incident of sovreignty

            This is factually distinguishable from the two prior cases in that these Chinese laborers had been in the US for a while.

                the difference is between exclusion and deportation

                    [now, everything is called a removal, but they retain the distinction]

            ISSUE: can congress req the testimony of a white witness to avoid deportation?

            HOLDING: Due process applies and congress, not the court, decides what process is due, but the white witness rule satisfied due process

            BREWER DISSENT:

                Residents who are domiciled in the US have more rights than newcomers under international law.
                The 14th protects persons, not citizens.  It applies territorially.
                The process given by the exec is not enough to pass constitutional muster for him.
                People subject to deportation proceedings should get a bigger bundle of rights because they have greater ties.
                    [though this bit about ties is not always]

            FIELD DISSENT:

                Active in CA anti-immigration, author of chinese exclusion case majority

                he dissents here bc

                    8thA deportation is cruel and unusual
                    4thA deportation is an unreasonable seizure

            Deportation and Foreign Affairs:

                what's the relationship betweeen deportation and FA?
                is it stronger than the rel between exclusion and FA?

                    weaker bc

                        exclusion affects more [Chinese nationals]
                        deportation is individualized

                        deportation affects a person who has become "part american"
                        exclusion affects a person who is still almost totally [Chinese]

            Based on the maj's rationale, it seems that there's only extremely limited space for review by the court.  p 121-122.  they're extremely deferential.

                Now we've created statutory rights to due process that would prevent this kind of crap.

            Is deportation punishment for which 8th amendments should apply?

                the goals of deportation align with the goals of punishment
                    it serves retributive and deterrent ends

                therefore it is punishment, but the maj refuses this analysis

        TEST FOR DUE PROCESS ANALYSIS:

            -is the due process clause implicated?

                -is there a state action?
                -is there individual decisionmaking?
                -is there deprivation of life LIBERTY property?

            -if so, what process is due?

                maj says:  whatever the fuck the executive gave you

                modern test: matthew's v eldridge

                    -private interest to be affected
                    -risk of erroneous deprivation
                    -probable value of additional or substitute procedural safeguards
                    -the gov's interest, including the function involved and the burdens that extra process would put on the gov

                    if we applied this test to fong yue ting, things would come out differently

            These first three cases are still used sometimes to show congress's plenary immigration power

            Ways to reject dp challenges in exclusion cases:

                1- procedural due process is not owed to this class of persons
                2- pro dp is owed, but whatever the political branches decide is enough

    KNAUFF v SHAUGHNESSY

        whatever is authorized by congress IS dp as far as an alien denied entry is concerned.

        it seems the court might not even have the power to review

    SHAUGHNESSY v US EX REL MEZEI aka

    MEZEI

        guy stranded on Ellis Island case

        FACTS:  foreign-born dude lives in US for years, leaves to visit his dying mom, and attempts to return on a visa

        all he's asking for is a hearing to figure out why he's being excluded

        ISSUE:  whether his detention and exclusion without an evidentiary hearing constitutes a denial of due process

        they say no DP violation, and cite all the usual garbage about sov power

        the maj says the issue is largely immune from judicial review

            why does the maj hold so brutally?

                -he went "behind the iron curtain"
                -he was gone for 19 months

            ENTRY FICTION: we use this legal fiction to claim that people entering the US are not in the territory of the US until they're "through the gates."  Ellis Island or JFK are not considered US territory in this sense.

        more deference to congress

        you'd argue to limit this holding by emphasizing the national security aspect of this fact pattern

            this limits the discretion of the political branches

        DISSENT:

            he was detained indefinitely!

                otherwise, he'd probably side with the maj


Immigration Law Day 3
01/26/16

    Simulation:

        I'm judge for the Avalos case.

        10 min to argue
        plan 2 min argument cold, then be ready to answer questions

        -intro
            may it please the court
            my name is ____, and I represent _____
        -2 min roadmap
        -arguments
            fact-centered
            doctrinal
            policy-centered
        -conclude

    Procedural due process continued

    MEZZEI continuted

        ISSUE:  whether mezei's detention and exclusion without an evidentiary hearing constitutes a denial of due proces

        someone in exclusion proceedings can be indefinitely detained

    PLASENCIA

        duration of absence informs the court's analysis

    YAMATAYA v FISHER

        ISSUE: is Yamataya entitled to due process and, if so, how much process is due?

        FACTS:  japanese national being deported.  she was admitted, but 4 days later determined likely to become a public charge.  she's therefore inadmissable, and deportable.  she's deported after a crappy little hearing.

        she objects on due process grounds, saying, i didn't even undertsand i was in a deportation proceeding

        The court admits that she's owed due process, but says in this case that due process that was given is all that was due.  she had some informal notice and a chance to be heard

        This is different from mezei because she was in the country, not at border.

        This cannot be totally reconciled with FONG YUE TING because
            in FYT, whatever congress gave was enough and the court was not willing to review,
            but here the court is willing to give judicial review to a case that involves a deportation proceeding
                though they both tolerate the fate of the people involved

    MATTHEWS balancing test determines the content of the Pro Due Proc rights

    EVERYTHING ABOVE IS ABOUT CONSTITUTIONAL PROCEDURAL DUE PROCESS FOR DEPORTEES AND THOSE EXCLUDED

    HERE STARTS THE INQUIRY INTO SUBSTANTIVE DUE PROCESS

    HARISIADES v SHAUGHNESSY

        3 communists case

        ISSUES:
            -whether the act deprives the LPRs of liberty w/o due process under the 5th
            -whether the act violates LPRs of 1stA right to freedom of speech and association
            -whether the act is an ex post facto law forbidden by ART 1 SEC 9 CL 3

        FACTS:
            long time residents of the US,
            all married to US residents
            and parents of US citizen children.
            none convicted of a crime.
            Harisiades became noticed during a textile strike.
                in the investigation, he admitted to being a Communist
                but disclaimed any commitment to violence
            backdrop of fear of foreigners

        court's analysis of 5thA issue:

            court does something like rational basis review
                (flies as long as it's not insane, flies here)
            reasons to bring out subs due process:
                legislation implicates a Fundamental Right (enumerated or implied)
                legislation implicates a suspect class

            court: no FR implicated, therefore RBR governs, rationally related, OK

        court's analysis of the 1stA issue:

            it's a DENNIS-style "advocating force and violence" analysis
                in other words, it's about the content of the 1stA, not the applicability
            the court makes no reference to plenary power doctrine
                they don't use the "special principles for noncitizens"
            they see a clear and present danger of an important evil (overthrow)

Immigration Law Day 4
01/28/16

    Substantive Application of the Plenary Power Doctrine

    HARISIADES V. SHAUGHNESSY

        Issue: Whether the Act deprives the LPRs or liberty without due process under 5th Amendment?

            No. Rational Basis review, as long as the means is rational and reasonable then it is ok. Means fit the ends à rationally related

        Whether the Act violates LPRs of 1st Amendment right to freedom of speech and association?

            No. Whether the restricted speech posed a “clear and present danger” of bringing about a sufficiently important evil. à Dennis Test

                Then not protected.
                Clear and present danger à by allowing them to stay (assumes it, doesn’t analyze it)

            Difference between peaceful and violent speech. 2nd is not protected.

        Nothing in the case contracts the scope of the 1st Amendment in the deportation context.  à no separate test, same test for all (citizen or not)

        Whether the Act is an ex post facto law forbidden by Art. I, sec. 9, cl. 3 of the Constitution?

            No.

        Since 1920 Congress has allowed deportation against advocates of overthrowing the government by violence or force à not caught “unawares” by a change in the law (on notice)

        Either way, deportation is a civil procedure (not criminal). Ex post facto applies to retroactive application of a criminal law (punishment) not civil.

        Majority

            Review will be deferential à largely immune in this case

            Concern here is about Communist conspiracy à not fantasy or pretense, cannot say there are no possible grounds of Congress’ alarm (will defer to Congress)

            Rational Basis Review à law must be rationally related to the purpose (means and end)

        Frankfurter

            Court should not even be reviewing à entirely immune
                Due Process Clause

        Dissent says this has been violated by the federal government

    FIALLO V. BELL

            Law prohibited fathers, not mothers, from conferring immigration benefits
            Limited judicial responsibility à allows the court to review
            Rational Basis Test
                Rational relations between the law and the benefits à constitutional

    FRANCIS V. INS

        Issue: Does a statute that makes a distinction between LPRs who had left the US temporarily and those who had not violate the Equal Protection Clause?

        Francis is an LPR who was convicted of a crime and it was a deportable offense.
        Concedes to deportability à argues that discretionary relief should be available to those who either leave the country or stay (equal protection argument)

        Rational Basis scrutiny used à says that the law does violate equal protection (under 5th and 14th Amendment)

        Government hasn’t offered any reason on why they do this à need some reason (really any reason) under Rational Basis


    INS V. CHADHA

        Issue: Is the provision of the INA 244(c)(2) that allows for a one-house legislative veto constitutional?

        Holding: No. Unconstitutional.

        Remained a year after his visa expired, applied for suspension of deportation, and an immigration judge suspended his deportation. The judge found that Chadha met the requirements of 244:

            o   Resided in the US for 7 years
            o   Was of good moral character
            o   Would suffer “extreme hardship” if deported

        Permitted either House of Congress to “legislate” without following the requirements that the Constitution lays out à passage by both houses and presentation to the President

        Not a political question à meets none of the circumstances outlined in Baker v. Carr

        Even though it is regulation of immigration, it is the job of the court to determine constitutionality

        Draws a means versus content distinction

    ZADVYDAS V. DAVIS

        Issue: Is the AG only allowed to detain deportable LPRs for the period reasonably necessary to secure the LPR’s removal, or may the AG detain the LPR indefinitely?

        Holding:  Yes, the AG is only allowed to detain deportable LPRs for the period reasonably necessary to secure the LPR’s removal.

        §  Reasonable time limit = 6 months (from legislative history)

        Civil confinement at issue is not limited, but potentially permanent
        Different from Mezei

        Mezei left, was no longer considered within the “geographical boarders” à goes back to the idea of exclusion v. deportation

        On its face, it would violate the 5th Amendment Due Process Clause

        Freedom is the heart of liberty mentioned in the clause

        No sufficiently strong special justification here for indefinite civil detention (not under the statute) à does not find congressional intent

        Use of the word “may” does not suggest unlimited discretion

    Dissent

        Have Procedural Due Process rights, but nothing more

Immigration Law Day 5
02/2/16

    ZADVYDAS

        I: Is the AG only allowed to detain deportable LPRs for the period reasonably necessary to secure the LPR’s removal, or may the AG detain the LPR indefinitely?

        Punchline: If you're in the counrty, they can't indefinitely detain you pending removal proceedings.

        Does the plenary power doctrine allow the government to treat immigrants worse than citizens?

            lawyer for defendant: 8thA, plenary power doesn't work here bc this isnt a FR matter

                the plenary power doctrine stands on stronger footing when we're talking about admission, and it has less force in the substantive constitutional questions like equal protection

    CLARK v MARTINEZ

        F: a cuban national paroled into the US.
        different from mezei bc this is not about national security

            parole means that you're released under supervision with certain conditions of behavior, you're not admitted.  same constructive notion of non-presence as mezei.

        no indefinite detention in exclusion proceedings.  after 6 months detainee can petition for supervised release

    Indefinite Detention:  more permissible where national security is at play

    DEMORE v HYUNG JOON KIM

        I: does due process require that the immigration service provide a noncitizen charged with removal an individual hearing to determine the need for detention pending the removal hearing

        H: No. INS may detain regardless of danger or flight risk

        They have less of a liberty interest, according to the court.

        F: LPR convicted of two crimes.  Detained without availability of bond.

        MAJ: likelihood of a flight risk or a danger to the community is enough to detain.

            maj: conviction for an aggravated felony is a good enough proxy for this

            maj: this detention is fine bc it's relatively short

            this approach avoids the false negative problem

                (we avoid the situation where a hearing results in a release that results in a crime against the community)

            this is easier and simpler and less costly to the agency

                they don't have to do individual determinations which take time

            it also gives everybody notice that the penalty for set crimes is detention

                this serves a deterrence goal

            Maj sees this as a substantive due process case

                they accept the studies congress conducted about flight risk and crime while waiting for a removal hearing as legit justification

                they should have used heightened scrutiny bc this affects a FR

                    it says it only is using RBR
                    instead it actually examines emprirical evidence, which is more like the heightened review we know from IR and SS

        DISSENT: there should be an individualized hearing first

            this is not a good proxy.  it sloppily classifies a whole group at once.

            this causes many false positives

                it puts people in detention who are not dangerous or flighty

            these detentions are much longer than the 30-40 days the court considers

                it's more like hundreds of days that a person might be detained before he even sees an immigration judge

            for something as important as a liberty interest, there should be a hearing

            it's expensive to lock people up too, just as it's expensive to hold hearings

            and then there's the costs to the individual

                no family, no school, no work, and it HINDERS DEFENSE

            dissent's use of ZADVYDAS:

                they read it not as a statutory interpretation case
                rather as a case for individualized determinations
                they read it more broadly to transcend the facts of the case

            dissent sees this as both a procedural and substantive due process case

Immigration Law Day 6
2/2/16

    I vote to overrule Chae Chan Ping and adopt rational basis review for all legislation affecting aliens and sliding heightened review for all legislation affecting aliens that imlpicates fundamental rights as recognized for citizens of the united states or human rights as recognized by customary internaitonal law, and strict scrutiny for all laws that classify on racial grounds.  Under the new standard of review, this legislation is struck down as irrational, arbitrary legislation evidencing a bare desire to harm by the legislature.

    CASE ONE

        initial entrants, whatever congress says counts as due process

        COUNSEL FOR IMMIGRANTS

            -whether subject to judicial review

                constitutionally permissible means are subject to review CHADHA
                change in international standards
                still have rights under international law
                difference between claim to process and claim to entry

            -whether it is constitutional

                overbroad, irrelevant classifications
                not narrowly tailored
                overinclusive means (ethnicity/spoken language)
                violates 14th
                antithetical to claimed purpose

        COUNSEL FOR GOV

            -regulation is within plenary power

                exclusion has been long recognized
                its part of national sovereignty
                stare decisis
                even less ties to country in this case

            -public safety is a legit end, means are appropriate

                qualifies as a compelling gov interest
                political question

    CASE TWO

        I acted as judge here.

    CASE 3

        COUNSEL FOR IMMIGRANTS

            -contsitutionality/substantive due process

                violative of 1stA
                right to peaceful assembly


            -procedural due process

                LPR deserve more due process
                equal protection violation too?
                more cracks in PDP
                deportation of LPR in deportation proceedings 5thA rights due

        COUNSEL FOR GOV

            -Harisiades controls

                cannot distinguish this from that
                therefore only rbr applies
                means are rationally related
                ends are legitimate

            -1stA

                there is a clear and present danger

            -Procedural due process

                no additional probative value of more process

            -equal protection

                petitioner classified based on behavior, not race
                [c/a you can't distinguish between LPRs FRANCIS]

Immigration Law Day 7
2/9/16

    HARISIADES:  cursory analysis suggests same first amendment test for aliens and citizens
        ex post facto only applies to criminal laws, deportation is a civil proceeding
    FIALLO: you can treat citizens and LPRS differently
        but no treating LPRs differently within the LPR class

    As we move forward in the simulation exercise, the petitioner has stronger cases

    PLENARY POWER AND FEDERALISM STARTS HERE

        we're handling the states' roles in all this

        TWO frameworks:

            -EP analysis
            -Preemption

    GRAHAM v RICHARDSON

        Equal Protection Clause as limit in discrimination against noncitizens

        Federal Immigration Power as limit

        Two LPRS

        PA denied access to welfare to all LPRs
        AZ denied access to welfare to all LPRs except those who have been there 15 years

            these laws treat citizens and non-citizens differently

        14thA prohibits states from denying any PERSON due process

        EP ANALYSIS

            normally state laws that govern econ and welfare get mere RBR

                gov purpose:  protecting special public interests in conserving scarce resources by giving benefits to citizens first

                means:  denying benefits to aliens

                normally this would fly.  RBR is a low bar.

            but here, alienage is implicated, so SS

                [but is noncitizen a discrete and insular class?]

                    -history of discrimination
                    -mutability of characteristic
                    -political power of group
                    -relevance

            then we need a narrowly tailored law that serves a compelling gov purpose

            protecting fiscal integrity is not a compelling enough interest to justify burdening aliens

        FEDERALISM ANALYSIS

            where federal legislation occupies a field, no state can regulate that area

            the federal law that the state law here conflicts with:

                -general freedom of movement between the states (comes from INA)

                    this state law impacts the right to travel by affecting carrot and stick

                -INA says a ground of exclusion or inadmissability is likelihood to be a public charge

                    fed law decides entry based on poverty.  this state law affects poverty.

        Both laws struck down on EP and Federalism grounds

    ARIZONA v UNITED STATES

        Field and Conflict Preemption as limit

            states cannot legislate to impact the federal immigration program

            except where it does not conflict with INA

        Facts:

            this case contemplates undocumented immigrants

            AZ state law  purports to give AZ state cops authority to enforce federal immigration law

                they though the feds weren't doing their jobs
                and that AZ was bearing the brunt

        Gov is using its "prosecutorial" discretion in deciding who to remove
        Gov has preempted the field

        Section 3

            Struck

            failure to carry federal card is a state crime

            this disrupts the careful balance struck by federal law*

                [preemption by implication==field preemption]*
                [directly conflicting statutory enactment==conflict preemption]*
                [express preemption does what it says on the label]

            state law offers no probation, and federal law does

        Section 5

            Struck

            makes it a state crime for unauthorized aliens to apply for work

            stands as an obstacle to the careful balance struck by feds

                the feds criminalize the employer side, not the employee side

                the fact that different means are chosen means theres a conflict

        Section 6

            Struck

            authorizes warrantless arrests of people that cops had PC to believe the person has created a removable offense

            this gives too much discretion to the individual officer

                the feds contemplate much more process

                this state law begins a criminal process, feds don't contemplate criminal process

                    you get a notice to appear and a judge makes the removal decision

                to detain a person under federal law requires a specific reason (flight, danger to community)

                    this state law allows a state cop to detain without that

                    this would allow a state to enact its own immigration policy

        Section 2(B)

            Upheld

            the papers please provision.  Cops authorized to make a reasonable attempt to determine the immigration status of any person they stop

            here, the ct sees no conflict with federal law bc

                federal law encourages cooperation between states and feds

                and this law does exactly that

                C/A in reality, this will lead to unlawful racial profiling

                    this conflicts with federal law

                    random checkpoints would be ok
                    but this will be applied based on looks and language

                They leave to door open to "as applied" challenges

        DISSENT

            Scalia: States have sov power, police power, field preemption doesn't exist
            Alito: Congress would have had to spoken more clearly to preempt
                a conflict with enforcement priorities is not enough

Immigration Law Day 8
2/11/16

    Cont.

        Alito recognizes federal supremacy, but wants more clarity before preemption

            He would have upheld 5, bc a conflict with federal priorities is not enough

            He would have upheld 2b, bc it does not expand cop authority

            He also says the MAJ goes beyond the normal federal preemption analysis

                traditional analysis would require a more direct conflict

                the MAJ instead is relying on the plenary power doctrine

        The MAJ doesn't use an EP analysis even though it could.  It uses preemption.

            why not argue EP here?  why is federalism a better choice?

                this statute is not facially repugnant to the constitution

    HERE STARTS "IMMIGRANT PRIORITIES"

        non-immigrants are seeking temporary admission
        immigrants are seeking to remain more permanently

            immigrants get a bigger bundle of benefits

                -possibility to stay
                -greater options to work
                -more public benefits
                -citizenship candidacy

        If you're exempt form the quotas, then there's no wait for you except the administrative wait

        Immediate relatives of citizens are exempt

        Parole != admission

            for admin of humanitarian purposes

            no count against quota

            there's a legal fiction that says a parolee is at the border

        Refugees are also exempt from the quotas

            they have their own quota system though

        Congress can also give a special pass to certain specfic groups from time to time

        Pretty much every other immigrant is subject to the quotas

        Three main quota categories:

            Most visas are reserved for FAMILIES 480k

                the main purpose of our immigration law is family reunification

            Though we, for policy reasons, should welcome in brain power under EMPLOYMENT visas

                140k

            DIVERSITY visas 50k

Immigration Law Day 9
2/16/16

    immediate relative == spouse or child of a US citizen

    SPOUSES

        1-same sex marriage under INA
        2-process of obtaining immigration benefits through marriage

        ADAMS v HOWERTON

            FACTS:  Male US citizen Adams, Male foreign partner.  they get a marriage license.  They try to get marriage benefits.  denied

            ISSUES:

                whether a same-sex spouse does not count under 201b
                whether that interpretation would be constitutional

            COURT:

                it's not clear whether its valid in colorado
                but it doesnt matter
                because the marriage doesnt qualify under the act

                they look to congressional intent in order to determine that as the feds used it, spouse has a specialized meaning

                    spouse, for them, means a person of the opposite sex

                they use statutory interpretation methods to determine opposite sex req

                CHEVRON rationales for deference:

                    -agency expertise
                    -congress delegated this power to the agency

                Above is the statutory interpretation portion
                Below is the constitutional analysis

                despite the fact that this implicates sex (IR) and possibly marriage (SS), the court applies RBR bc the plenary power doctrine permits congress to regulate immigration matters with limited judicial review

                    congressional powers are at their max when they're related to exclusion of aliens

                    [also, this is about conferral of benefits, not about due process at border]

                    but giving him immediate relative status would allow him to stay even though his license to remain was about to expire, so it is related

                so, applying RBR, the court upholds

                    the purpose of privileging hetero couples here is prevention of the hardship of separation, and family unity of families that don't produce offspring

                        are separations of homosexual couples less hardship?

                            no

                            but, the ct mentions family integrity and the no offspring connection

Immigration Law Day 10
2/18/16

    ADAMS v HOWERTON cont

        Same sex policy changes:

            surgeon general 1979 declared homosexuality is not a psychosis or a deviant sexual practice

            States and other nations had been working toward recognition of gay marriage

            Windsor struck down part of DOMA

        The exec MUST now extend all the same benefits for same sex and opposite sex spouses

    MATTER OF ZELENIAK

        this is a case from the appellate board within the agency

        its decisions can be appealed to the federal court

        Two males married in VT

        petition on behalf of spouse denied pre-WINDSOR

        while appeal was pending, SCOTUS decides WINDSOR

        without the DOMA barrier, INA now recognizes same-sex marriages

        find marriage legallly valid and the only inquiry remains is:

        whether the marriage is bona fide

    IMFA and FRAUDULENT MARRIAGES

        bilateral: its a mutual deal, one spouse pays another for the benefits
        unilateral: one spouse tricks another for the benefits

        216 incompletely paraphrased:

            SEC of HS can terminate LPR status on finding that marriage was for benefits

            Anyone who gets benefits from a fresh marriage has a condition to meet

            CONGRESS is saying marriages less than 2 years are fraudulent
            or fraudulent marriages are unlikely to survive 2 years

            2 year period measured from time LPR status is acquired

Immigration Law Day 11
2/23/16

    EXAM:  if you spot an ambiguity, explore it

    Who is a parent, a child, and a brother undet the INA

    MATTER OF MOURILLON

        step sister case, 101b1c definition of a child p42, 203a4

        petitioner is trying to sponsor in a step sister

        the father they share doesn't do the job, but the step mother does

        The relationship with the father doesn't work bc 101b1D + C

            the petitioner was born out of wedlock
            and not legitimated under the laws of curacao

        The beneficiary is a child of the "stepmother" (her mom) though under 101b1A

        The petitioner is a child of the stepmother under 101b1B

            he was under 18 when his bio dad married his stepmom

            petitioner is a stepchild

        They share a common parent in the mother

            as a result they are considered siblings under 203a4

Immigration Law Day 12
2/25/16

    EXAM: KNOW 201b2Ai, 203, 101b, Visa Bulletin, 216 cold

        who is an immediate relative
        who qualifies the for the 4 family sponsored visas
        who qualifies as a child under 101b
        marriage-based immigration

    ENDS FAMILY SECTION
    BEGINS EMPLOYMENT BASED VISAS

    Goals:

        -get to know the 5 categories
        -learn the labor certification process
        -apply the business necessity test for unduly restrictive job reqs

            and learn the ethical issues

    203b1 "superstars"

        undersubscribed
        no job offer req

        A- extraordinary ability in science, arts, etc
        B- outstanding professors
        C

    203b2 "stars"

    203b3

        this is the category that's usually oversubscribed
        US job offer req
        labor certification req

        these first three categories represent workers congress though would be valuable

    LABOR CERTIFICATION

        the new (2005) process is called PERM

        MATTER OF MARION GRAHAM

            BALCA denies the certification

            the agency has declared by reg that job requirements should not be unduly restrictive

                if it is, employer must prove business nec

                the employer here fails to do this

                she merely asserts the need, without specificity or documentation

        When to show biz nec:

            job req not normally req for the job
            job req that exceed those listed on ONET
            foreign language req

        What is a business necessity?

            reasonable relationship between job duties / req (playing golf)
            AND
            occupation (being a lawyer by critical thinking) in context of employer's biz

            job duties / reqs are essential to perform the job in a reasonable manner

            application example:

                IS THERE A REASONBLE RELATIONSHIP [between spanish speaking and waitering]?

                    here, yes, (this is a low std)

                ARE THE REQS ESSENTIAL TO PERFORM THE JOB IN A REASONABLE MANNER?

                    allowing customers to speak in their first language is essential

                    but this is a hard argument to make

                [use documentation to show that some of your business is contingent on golf, or spanish eg]

            the purpose of the labor certification process is to ensure that no US worker is ready willing and able.  the job offer must not be written to rule out US workers, so the "undue restriction" analysis


    SO ENDS IMMIGRANT FAMILY AND IMMIGRANT EMPLOYMENT VISAS
    NONIMMIGRANT VISAS

        Goals of this section:

            learn the categories of nonimmigrant visas
            undertsand that law presumes immigrant intent
            distinguish preconceived intent from dual intent

        Categories of nonimmigrants

            commercial
            educational
            tourist
            fiancees
            other

        to qualify for a nonimmigrant visa:

            apply to consulate abroad and present the visa at the border

            show you meet the reqs of that particular visa
            prove you're not inadmissible

    BRICKLAYERS v MEESE

        the union says the west germans don't fit into the B1 visa bc they were coming to do skilled labor

        the INS reg that allows this is problematic bc it contravenes the statutory language in B1, which prohibits issuance of that visa if you're coming to do skilled labor

        the court holds the INS op instruction conflicts with the INA

        the statutory language is clear, and the agency misinterpreted

            they look to language of statute and the intent of congress
            (statutory interpretations used: plain meaning and purpose)

        on balance, even if there are multiple purposes, the statutory language suggests disallowing this type of skilled labor under the B1 visa

        the INS op instruction is the admin interp

        under HIRA, incidental labor is permissible

            labor done incident to intenrational commerce is allowed

    H-2's lesser skilled workers, and labor shortages

        both req labor cert
            but its just an attestation by employers
        h2a is for ag
            up to 1 yr, as long as needed
            no caps
        h2b is for other labor
            up to 3 year w 1 year increments
            subect to caps

        H2b is meant to include a wide range of workers
            semi pro hockey
            alaskan fishing workers

    L VISAS

    KARMALI

        court defers to agency interpretation over top of the clear language

    F VISAS

        can attend almost any educational institution

    interpret statutory ambiguity in favor of a would-be deportee

    EXAM: 3-3.5 hours, INA can come in, short answer, issue spotter

    Explore all the ambiguities

    EXCLUSION GROUNDS AND WAIVERS

        understand:

            various grounds for exclusion
            when waivers are available
            how long each noncitizen will be excluded

    analysis:

        what are possible applicable grounds of inadmissability?
        are the criteria met?
        is there a waiver available?

    ADMISSION PROCEDURE

        objectives:

            understand the steps in the admission process and what role each party plays
            understand level of discretion consular officers have in granting or denying

        modern admission procedure:

            -obtain a labor certification from DOL, if needed
            -prepare and file a visa petitition with USCIS (the US Sponsor does this)
            -prep and file a visa application with US consulate abroad and obtain visa
                (the beneficiary does this)
            -noncitizen appears with visa and other docs for inspection at entry point

    DEPORTABILITY GROUNDS

        learn:

            -grounds for deportation
            -when a noncitizen makes entry or is admitted

    GREAT EXAM METHOD:

        only quote the parts of the statute that are MOST RELEVANT

        then APPLY THE FACTS TO THE STATUTE
        make the connection explicit

        focus the answer on the issues that matter most.
        pick the interesting and difficult issue to analyze.

        Rule, Application, Counter-argument, Conclusion

            Rule: restate what it means
            Application: recognize the ambiguity, tackle it head on, pick a side
            Counter-arg: hit the other side of the ambiguity,
            Conclusion: pick a side, assert why my side is better, add a policy argument

    EXAM: expect a deportation question, because it causes analysis of inadmissability

    CRIME RELATED DEPORTABILITY GROUNDS

        was there a conviction?
            and what is a conviction?

        did any conduct following conviction erase it for INA purposes?

            withdrawing guilty pleas
            expungements

        PADILLA

            counsel must avoid providing affirmative misadvice
            counsel has an affirmative duty to advise that a guilty plea might lead to dep
            if consequence are clear, counsel must explain them
            if not clear, counsel must advise client of possible deportation

            STRICKLAND

                did conduct fall below objective professional standards of reasonableness
                was the client prejudiced by the error
                    (would outcome have been different but for the fuck up?)

                if it didn't affect the verdict, no sixth amendment violation

        SILVA-TREVINO

            what does moral turpitude mean?
            how do we determine it?
                -look at the crime in the abstract (categorical approach)
                -look at actual conduct/facts of case (modified categorical approach)

            Court adopts a limited modified categorical approach
                -look to statute for categorical approach analysis
                -looks to record of conviction and other select documents

        CIMT:

            fraud or conduct that is vile base or depraved and violates moral stds
            nonfraud CIMTs almost always involve intent to hurt someone

                stealing
                prostitution
                sex crimes
                threats
